of dimensions involved in the rule or pattern: If the items or attributes in an association rule or pattern reference only one dimension, it is a single-dimensional association rule/pattern. For example, Rules (7.1) and (7.2) are single-dimensional association rules because they each refer to only one dimension, buys.1 If a rule/pattern references two or more dimensions, such as age, income, and buys, then it is a multidimensional association rule/pattern. The following is an example of a multidimensional rule: age(X, “20...29”)∧income(X, “52K ...58K”)⇒buys(X, “iPad ”). (7.3) Based on the types of values handled in the rule or pattern: If a rule involves associ- ations between the presence or absence of items, it is a Boolean association rule. For example, Rules (7.1) and (7.2) are Boolean association rules obtained from market basket analysis. If a rule describes associations between quantitative items or attributes, then it is a quantitative association rule. In these rules, quantitative values for items or attributes are partitioned into intervals. Rule (7.3) can also be considered a quan- titative association rule where the quantitative attributes age and income have been discretized. Based on the constraints or criteria used to mine selective patterns: The patterns or rules to be discovered can be constraint-based (i.e., satisfying a set of user- deﬁned constraints), approximate, compressed, near-match (i.e., those that tally the support count of the near or almost matching itemsets), top-k (i.e., the k most frequent itemsets for a user-speciﬁed value, k), redundancy-aware top-k (i.e., the top-k patterns with similar or redundant patterns excluded), and so on. 1Following the terminology used in multidimensional databases, we refer to each distinct predicate in a rule as a dimension. 282 Chapter 7 Advanced Pattern Mining Alternatively, pattern mining can be classiﬁed with respect to the kinds of data and applications involved, using the following criteria: Based on kinds of data and features to be mined: Given relational and data ware- house data, most people are interested in itemsets. Thus, frequent pattern mining in this context is essentially frequent itemset mining, that is, to mine frequent sets of items. However, in many other applications, patterns may involve sequences and structures. For example, by studying the order in which items are frequently pur- chased, we may ﬁnd that customers tend to ﬁrst buy a PC, followed by a digital camera, and then a memory card. This leads to sequential patterns, that is, fre- quent subsequences (which are often separated by some other events) in a sequence of ordered events. We may also mine structural patterns, that is, frequent substructures, in a struc- tured data set. Note that structure is a general concept that covers many different kinds of structural forms such as directed graphs, undirected graphs, lattices, trees, sequences, sets, single items, or combinations of such structures. Single items are the simplest form of structure. Each element of a general pattern may contain a subse- quence, a subtree, a subgraph, and so on, and such containment relationships can be deﬁned recursively. Therefore, structural pattern mining can be considered as the most general form of frequent pattern mining. Based on application domain-speciﬁc semantics: Both data and applications can be very diverse, and therefore the patterns to be mined can differ largely based on their domain-speciﬁc semantics. Various kinds of application data include spatial data, temporal data, spatiotemporal data, multimedia data (e.g., image, audio, and video data), text data, time-series data, DNA and biological sequences, software programs, chemical compound structures, web structures, sensor networks, social and informa- tion networks, biological networks, data streams, and so on. This diversity can lead to dramatically different pattern mining methodologies. Based on data analysis usages: Frequent pattern mining often serves as an interme- diate step for improved data understanding and more powerful data analysis. For example, it can be used as a feature extraction step for classiﬁcation, which is often referred to as pattern-based classiﬁcation. Similarly, pattern-based clustering has shown its strength at clustering high-dimensional data. For improved data under- standing, patterns can be used for semantic annotation or contextual analysis. Pattern analysis can also be used in recommender systems, which recommend information items (e.g., books, movies, web pages) that are likely to be of interest to the user based on similar users’ patterns. Different analysis tasks may require mining rather different kinds of patterns as well. The next several sections present advanced methods and extensions of pattern min- ing, as well as their application. Section 7.2 discusses methods for mining multilevel patterns, multidimensional patterns, patterns and rules with continuous attributes, rare patterns, and negative patterns. Constraint-based pattern mining is studied in 7.2 Pattern Mining in Multilevel, Multidimensional Space 283 Section 7.3. Section 7.4 explains how to mine high-dimensional and colossal patterns. The mining of compressed and approximate patterns is detailed in Section 7.5. Section 7.6 discusses the exploration and applications of pattern mining. More advanced topics regarding mining sequential and structural patterns, and pattern mining in complex and diverse kinds of data are brieﬂy introduced in Chapter 13. 7.2 Pattern Mining in Multilevel, Multidimensional Space This section focuses on methods for mining in multilevel, multidimensional space. In particular, you will learn about mining multilevel associations (Section 7.2.1), multi- dimensional associations (Section 7.2.2), quantitative association rules (Section 7.2.3), and rare patterns and negative patterns (Section 7.2.4). Multilevel associations involve concepts at different abstraction levels. Multidimensional associations involve more than one dimension or predicate (e.g., rules that relate what a customer buys to his or her age). Quantitative association rules involve numeric attributes that have an implicit ordering among values (e.g., age). Rare patterns are patterns that suggest interesting although rare item combinations. Negative patterns show negative correlations between items. 7.2.1 Mining Multilevel Associations For many applications, strong associations discovered at high abstraction levels, though with high support, could be commonsense knowledge. We may want to drill down to ﬁnd novel patterns at more detailed levels. On the other hand, there could be too many scattered patterns at low or primitive abstraction levels, some of which are just trivial specializations of patterns at higher levels. Therefore, it is interesting to examine how to develop effective methods for mining patterns at multiple abstraction levels, with sufﬁcient ﬂexibility for easy traversal among different abstraction spaces. Example 7.1 Mining multilevel association rules. Suppose we are given the task-relevant set of trans- actional data in Table 7.1 for sales in an AllElectronics store, showing the items purchased for each transaction. The concept hierarchy for the items is shown in Figure 7.2. A con- cept hierarchy deﬁnes a sequence of mappings from a set of low-level concepts to a higher-level, more general concept set. Data can be generalized by replacing low-level concepts within the data by their corresponding higher-level concepts, or ancestors, from a concept hierarchy. Figure 7.2’s concept hierarchy has ﬁve levels, respectively referred to as levels 0 through 4, starting with level 0 at the root node for all (the most general abstraction level). Here, level 1 includes computer, software, printer and camera, and computer acces- sory; level 2 includes laptop computer, desktop computer, ofﬁce software, antivirus software, etc.; and level 3 includes Dell desktop computer, ..., Microsoft ofﬁce software, etc. Level 4 is the most speciﬁc abstraction level of this hierarchy. It consists of the raw data values. 284 Chapter 7 Advanced Pattern Mining Table 7.1 Task-Relevant Data, D TID Items Purchased T100 Apple 17′′ MacBook Pro Notebook, HP Photosmart Pro b9180 T200 Microsoft Ofﬁce Professional 2010, Microsoft Wireless Optical Mouse 5000 T300 Logitech VX Nano Cordless Laser Mouse, Fellowes GEL Wrist Rest T400 Dell Studio XPS 16 Notebook, Canon PowerShot SD1400 T500 Lenovo ThinkPad X200 Tablet PC, Symantec Norton Antivirus 2010 ... ... all Laptop Computer Software Printer and Camera Computer Accessory IBM Dell Microsoft HP Canon Fellowes LogiTech Desktop Office Antivirus Printer Digital Camera Wrist Pad Mouse Figure 7.2 Concept hierarchy for AllElectronics computer items. Concept hierarchies for nominal attributes are often implicit within the database schema, in which case they may be automatically generated using methods such as those described in Chapter 3. For our example, the concept hierarchy of Figure 7.2 was gene- rated from data on product speciﬁcations. Concept hierarchies for numeric attributes can be generated using discretization techniques, many of which were introduced in Chapter 3. Alternatively, concept hierarchies may be speciﬁed by users familiar with the data such as store managers in the case of our example. The items in Table 7.1 are at the lowest level of Figure 7.2’s concept hierarchy. It is difﬁcult to ﬁnd interesting purchase patterns in such raw or primitive-level data. For instance, if “Dell Studio XPS 16 Notebook” or “Logitech VX Nano Cordless Laser Mouse” occurs in a very small fraction of the transactions, then it can be difﬁcult to ﬁnd strong associations involving these speciﬁc items. Few people may buy these items together, making it unlikely that the itemset will satisfy minimum support. However, we would expect that it is easier to ﬁnd strong associations between generalized abstractions of these items, such as between “Dell Notebook” and “Cordless Mouse.” Association rules generated from mining data at multiple abstraction levels are called multiple-level or multilevel association rules. Multilevel association rules can be 7.2 Pattern Mining in Multilevel, Multidimensional Space 285 mined efﬁciently using concept hierarchies under a support-conﬁdence framework. In general, a top-down strategy is employed, where counts are accumulated for the calcu- lation of frequent itemsets at each concept level, starting at concept level 1 and working downward in the hierarchy toward the more speciﬁc concept levels, until no more fre- quent itemsets can be found. For each level, any algorithm for discovering frequent itemsets may be used, such as Apriori or its variations. A number of variations to this approach are described next, where each variation involves “playing” with the support threshold in a slightly different way. The variations are illustrated in Figures 7.3 and 7.4, where nodes indicate an item or itemset that has been examined, and nodes with thick borders indicate that an examined item or itemset is frequent. Using uniform minimum support for all levels (referred to as uniform support): The same minimum support threshold is used when mining at each abstraction level. For example, in Figure 7.3, a minimum support threshold of 5% is used throughout (e.g., for mining from “computer” downward to “laptop computer”). Both “computer” and “laptop computer” are found to be frequent, whereas “desktop computer” is not. When a uniform minimum support threshold is used, the search procedure is simpliﬁed. The method is also simple in that users are required to specify only computer [support = 10%] laptop computer [support= 6%] Level 1 min_sup=5% Level 2 min_sup=5% desktop computer [support = 4%] Figure 7.3 Multilevel mining with uniform support. computer [support = 10%] laptop computer [support = 6%] Level 1 min_sup=5% Level 2 min_sup=3% desktop computer [support = 4%] Figure 7.4 Multilevel mining with reduced support. 286 Chapter 7 Advanced Pattern Mining one minimum support threshold. An Apriori-like optimization technique can be adopted, based on the knowledge that an ancestor is a superset of its descendants: The search avoids examining itemsets containing any item of which the ancestors do not have minimum support. The uniform support approach, however, has some drawbacks. It is unlikely that items at lower abstraction levels will occur as frequently as those at higher abstraction levels. If the minimum support threshold is set too high, it could miss some mean- ingful associations occurring at low abstraction levels. If the threshold is set too low, it may generate many uninteresting associations occurring at high abstraction levels. This provides the motivation for the next approach. Using reduced minimum support at lower levels (referred to as reduced support): Each abstraction level has its own minimum support threshold. The deeper the abstraction level, the smaller the corresponding threshold. For example, in Figure 7.4, the minimum support thresholds for levels 1 and 2 are 5% and 3%, respectively. In this way, “computer,” “laptop computer,” and “desktop computer” are all considered frequent. Using item or group-based minimum support (referred to as group-based sup- port): Because users or experts often have insight as to which groups are more important than others, it is sometimes more desirable to set up user-speciﬁc, item, or group-based minimal support thresholds when mining multilevel rules. For example, a user could set up the minimum support thresholds based on product price or on items of interest, such as by setting particularly low support thresholds for “camera with price over $1000” or “Tablet PC,” to pay particular attention to the association patterns containing items in these categories. For mining patterns with mixed items from groups with different support thresh- olds, usually the lowest support threshold among all the participating groups is taken as the support threshold in mining. This will avoid ﬁltering out valuable patterns containing items from the group with the lowest support threshold. In the meantime, the minimal support threshold for each individual group should be kept to avoid generating uninteresting itemsets from each group. Other interest- ingness measures can be used after the itemset mining to extract truly interesting rules. Notice that the Apriori property may not always hold uniformly across all of the items when mining under reduced support and group-based support. However, efﬁcient methods can be developed based on the extension of the property. The details are left as an exercise for interested readers. A serious side effect of mining multilevel association rules is its generation of many redundant rules across multiple abstraction levels due to the “ancestor” relationships among items. For example, consider the following rules where “laptop computer” is an ancestor of “Dell laptop computer” based on the concept hierarchy of Figure 7.2, and 7.2 Pattern Mining in Multilevel, Multidimensional Space 287 where X is a variable representing customers who purchased items in AllElectronics transactions. buys(X, “laptop computer”) ⇒buys(X, “HP printer”) [support = 8%, conﬁdence = 70%] (7.4) buys(X, “Dell laptop computer”) ⇒buys(X, “HP printer”) [support = 2%, conﬁdence = 72%] (7.5) “If Rules (7.4) and (7.5) are both mined, then how useful is Rule (7.5)? Does it really provide any novel information?” If the latter, less general rule does not provide new infor- mation, then it should be removed. Let’s look at how this may be determined. A rule R1 is an ancestor of a rule R2, if R1 can be obtained by replacing the items in R2 by their ancestors in a concept hierarchy. For example, Rule (7.4) is an ancestor of Rule (7.5) because “laptop computer” is an ancestor of “Dell laptop computer.” Based on this deﬁni- tion, a rule can be considered redundant if its support and conﬁdence are close to their “expected” values, based on an ancestor of the rule. Example 7.2 Checking redundancy among multilevel association rules. Suppose that Rule (7.4) has a 70% conﬁdence and 8% support, and that about one-quarter of all “laptop computer” sales are for “Dell laptop computers.” We may expect Rule (7.5) to have a conﬁdence of around 70% (since all data samples of “Dell laptop computer” are also samples of “laptop computer”) and a support of around 2% (i.e., 8% × 1 4). If this is indeed the case, then Rule (7.5) is not interesting because it does not offer any additional information and is less general than Rule (7.4). 7.2.2 Mining Multidimensional Associations So far, we have studied association rules that imply a single predicate, that is, the pred- icate buys. For instance, in mining our AllElectronics database, we may discover the Boolean association rule buys(X, “digital camera”) ⇒buys(X, “HP printer”). (7.6) Following the terminology used in multidimensional databases, we refer to each distinct predicate in a rule as a dimension. Hence, we can refer to Rule (7.6) as a single- dimensional or intradimensional association rule because it contains a single distinct predicate (e.g., buys) with multiple occurrences (i.e., the predicate occurs more than once within the rule). Such rules are commonly mined from transactional data. Instead of considering transactional data only, sales and related information are often linked with relational data or integrated into a data warehouse. Such data stores are multidimensional in nature. For instance, in addition to keeping track of the items pur- chased in sales transactions, a relational database may record other attributes associated 288 Chapter 7 Advanced Pattern Mining with the items and/or transactions such as the item description or the branch location of the sale. Additional relational information regarding the customers who purchased the items (e.g., customer age, occupation, credit rating, income, and address) may also be stored. Considering each database attribute or warehouse dimension as a predicate, we can therefore mine association rules containing multiple predicates such as age(X, “20...29”) ∧occupation(X, “student”)⇒buys(X, “laptop”). (7.7) Association rules that involve two or more dimensions or predicates can be referred to as multidimensional association rules. Rule (7.7) contains three predicates (age, occupation, and buys), each of which occurs only once in the rule. Hence, we say that it has no repeated predicates. Multidimensional association rules with no repeated predi- cates are called interdimensional association rules. We can also mine multidimensional association rules with repeated predicates, which contain multiple occurrences of some predicates. These rules are called hybrid-dimensional association rules. An example of such a rule is the following, where the predicate buys is repeated: age(X, “20...29”) ∧buys(X, “laptop”)⇒buys(X, “HP printer”). (7.8) Database attributes can be nominal or quantitative. The values of nominal (or cate- gorical) attributes are “names of things.” Nominal attributes have a ﬁnite number of possible values, with no ordering among the values (e.g., occupation, brand, color). Quantitative attributes are numeric and have an implicit ordering among values (e.g., age, income, price). Techniques for mining multidimensional association rules can be categorized into two basic approaches regarding the treatment of quantitative attributes. In the ﬁrst approach, quantitative attributes are discretized using predeﬁned concept hierarchies. This discretization occurs before mining. For instance, a concept hierarchy for income may be used to replace the original numeric values of this attribute by inter- val labels such as “0..20K,” “21K..30K,” “31K..40K,” and so on. Here, discretization is static and predetermined. Chapter 3 on data preprocessing gave several techniques for discretizing numeric attributes. The discretized numeric attributes, with their interval labels, can then be treated as nominal attributes (where each interval is considered a category). We refer to this as mining multidimensional association rules using static discretization of quantitative attributes. In the second approach, quantitative attributes are discretized or clustered into “bins” based on the data distribution. These bins may be further combined during the mining process. The discretization process is dynamic and established so as to satisfy some min- ing criteria such as maximizing the conﬁdence of the rules mined. Because this strategy treats the numeric attribute values as quantities rather than as predeﬁned ranges or cat- egories, association rules mined from this approach are also referred to as (dynamic) quantitative association rules. Let’s study each of these approaches for mining multidimensional association rules. For simplicity, we conﬁne our discussion to interdimensional association rules. Note that rather than searching for frequent itemsets (as is done for single-dimensional association rule mining), in multidimensional association rule mining we search for 7.2 Pattern Mining in Multilevel, Multidimensional Space 289 frequent predicate sets. A k-predicate set is a set containing k conjunctive predicates. For instance, the set of predicates {age, occupation, buys} from Rule (7.7) is a 3-predicate set. Similar to the notation used for itemsets in Chapter 6, we use the notation Lk to refer to the set of frequent k-predicate sets. 7.2.3 Mining Quantitative Association Rules As discussed earlier, relational and data warehouse data often involve quantitative attributes or measures. We can discretize quantitative attributes into multiple inter- vals and then treat them as nominal data in association mining. However, such simple discretization may lead to the generation of an enormous number of rules, many of which may not be useful. Here we introduce three methods that can help overcome this difﬁculty to discover novel association relationships: (1) a data cube method, (2) a clustering-based method, and (3) a statistical analysis method to uncover exceptional behaviors. Data Cube–Based Mining of Quantitative Associations In many cases quantitative attributes can be discretized before mining using predeﬁned concept hierarchies or data discretization techniques, where numeric values are replaced by interval labels. Nominal attributes may also be generalized to higher conceptual levels if desired. If the resulting task-relevant data are stored in a relational table, then any of the frequent itemset mining algorithms we have discussed can easily be modiﬁed so as to ﬁnd all frequent predicate sets. In particular, instead of searching on only one attribute like buys, we need to search through all of the relevant attributes, treating each attribute–value pair as an itemset. Alternatively, the transformed multidimensional data may be used to construct a data cube. Data cubes are well suited for the mining of multidimensional association rules: They store aggregates (e.g., counts) in multidimensional space, which is essen- tial for computing the support and conﬁdence of multidimensional association rules. An overview of data cube technology was presented in Chapter 4. Detailed algorithms for data cube computation were given in Chapter 5. Figure 7.5 shows the lattice of cuboids deﬁning a data cube for the dimensions age, income, and buys. The cells of an n-dimensional cuboid can be used to store the support counts of the corresponding n-predicate sets. The base cuboid aggregates the task-relevant data by age, income, and buys; the 2-D cuboid, (age, income), aggregates by age and income, and so on; the 0-D (apex) cuboid contains the total number of transactions in the task-relevant data. Due to the ever-increasing use of data warehouse and OLAP technology, it is pos- sible that a data cube containing the dimensions that are of interest to the user may already exist, fully or partially materialized. If this is the case, we can simply fetch the corresponding aggregate values or compute them using lower-level materialized aggre- gates, and return the rules needed using a rule generation algorithm. Notice that even in this case, the Apriori property can still be used to prune the search space. If a given k-predicate set has support sup, which does not satisfy minimum support, then further 290 Chapter 7 Advanced Pattern Mining (income) (buys) (age) () (income, buys) (age, income, buys) (age, income) (age, buys) 0-D (apex) cuboid 1-D cuboids 2-D cuboids 3-D (base) cuboid Figure 7.5 Lattice of cuboids, making up a 3-D data cube. Each cuboid represents a different group-by. The base cuboid contains the three predicates age, income, and buys. exploration of this set should be terminated. This is because any more-specialized ver- sion of the k-itemset will have support no greater than sup and, therefore, will not satisfy minimum support either. In cases where no relevant data cube exists for the mining task, we must create one on-the-ﬂy. This becomes an iceberg cube computation problem, where the minimum support threshold is taken as the iceberg condition (Chapter 5). Mining Clustering-Based Quantitative Associations Besides using discretization-based or data cube–based data sets to generate quantita- tive association rules, we can also generate quantitative association rules by clustering data in the quantitative dimensions. (Recall that objects within a cluster are similar to one another and dissimilar to those in other clusters.) The general assumption is that interesting frequent patterns or association rules are in general found at relatively dense clusters of quantitative attributes. Here, we describe a top-down approach and a bottom-up approach to clustering that ﬁnds quantitative associations. A typical top-down approach for ﬁnding clustering-based quantitative frequent pat- terns is as follows. For each quantitative dimension, a standard clustering algorithm (e.g., k-means or a density-based clustering algorithm, as described in Chapter 10) can be applied to ﬁnd clusters in this dimension that satisfy the minimum support thresh- old. For each cluster, we then examine the 2-D spaces generated by combining the cluster with a cluster or nominal value of another dimension to see if such a combination passes the minimum support threshold. If it does, we continue to search for clusters in this 2-D region and progress to even higher-dimensional combinations. The Apriori prun- ing still applies in this process: If, at any point, the support of a combination does not have minimum support, its further partitioning or combination with other dimensions cannot have minimum support either. 7.2 Pattern Mining in Multilevel, Multidimensional Space 291 A bottom-up approach for ﬁnding clustering-based frequent patterns works by ﬁrst clustering in high-dimensional space to form clusters with support that satisﬁes the minimum support threshold, and then projecting and merging those clusters in the space containing fewer dimensional combinations. However, for high-dimensional data sets, ﬁnding high-dimensional clustering itself is a tough problem. Thus, this approach is less realistic. Using Statistical Theory to Disclose Exceptional Behavior It is possible to discover quantitative association rules that disclose exceptional behavior, where “exceptional” is deﬁned based on a statistical theory. For example, the following association rule may indicate exceptional behavior: sex = female ⇒meanwage = $7.90/hr (overall mean wage = $9.02/hr). (7.9) This rule states that the average wage for females is only $7.90/hr. This rule is (subjec- tively) interesting because it reveals a group of people earning a signiﬁcantly lower wage than the average wage of $9.02/hr. (If the average wage was close to $7.90/hr, then the fact that females also earn $7.90/hr would be “uninteresting.”) An integral aspect of our deﬁnition involves applying statistical tests to conﬁrm the validity of our rules. That is, Rule (7.9) is only accepted if a statistical test (in this case, a Z-test) conﬁrms that with high conﬁdence it can be inferred that the mean wage of the female population is indeed lower than the mean wage of the rest of the population. (The above rule was mined from a real database based on a 1985 U.S. census.) An association rule under the new deﬁnition is a rule of the form: population subset ⇒mean of values for the subset, (7.10) where the mean of the subset is signiﬁcantly different from the mean of its complement in the database (and this is validated by an appropriate statistical test). 7.2.4 Mining Rare Patterns and Negative Patterns All the methods presented so far in this chapter have been for mining frequent patterns. Sometimes, however, it is interesting to ﬁnd patterns that are rare instead of frequent, or patterns that reﬂect a negative correlation between items. These patterns are respectively referred to as rare patterns and negative patterns. In this subsection, we consider various ways of deﬁning rare patterns and negative patterns, which are also useful to mine. Example 7.3 Rare patterns and negative patterns. In jewelry sales data, sales of diamond watches are rare; however, patterns involving the selling of diamond watches could be interest- ing. In supermarket data, if we ﬁnd that customers frequently buy Coca-Cola Classic or Diet Coke but not both, then buying Coca-Cola Classic and buying Diet Coke together 292 Chapter 7 Advanced Pattern Mining is considered a negative (correlated) pattern. In car sales data, a dealer sells a few fuel- thirsty vehicles (e.g., SUVs) to a given customer, and then later sells hybrid mini-cars to the same customer. Even though buying SUVs and buying hybrid mini-cars may be neg- atively correlated events, it can be interesting to discover and examine such exceptional cases. An infrequent (or rare) pattern is a pattern with a frequency support that is below (or far below) a user-speciﬁed minimum support threshold. However, since the occur- rence frequencies of the majority of itemsets are usually below or even far below the minimum support threshold, it is desirable in practice for users to specify other con- ditions for rare patterns. For example, if we want to ﬁnd patterns containing at least one item with a value that is over $500, we should specify such a constraint explic- itly. Efﬁcient mining of such itemsets is discussed under mining multidimensional associations (Section 7.2.1), where the strategy is to adopt multiple (e.g., item- or group-based) minimum support thresholds. Other applicable methods are discussed under constraint-based pattern mining (Section 7.3), where user-speciﬁed constraints are pushed deep into the iterative mining process. There are various ways we could deﬁne a negative pattern. We will consider three such deﬁnitions. Deﬁnition 7.1: If itemsets X and Y are both frequent but rarely occur together (i.e., sup(X ∪Y) < sup(X) × sup(Y)), then itemsets X and Y are negatively correlated, and the pattern X ∪Y is a negatively correlated pattern. If sup(X ∪Y) ≪sup(X) × sup(Y), then X and Y are strongly negatively correlated, and the pattern X ∪Y is a strongly negatively correlated pattern. □ This deﬁnition can easily be extended for patterns containing k-itemsets for k > 2. A problem with the deﬁnition, however, is that it is not null-invariant. That is, its value can be misleadingly inﬂuenced by null transactions, where a null-transaction is a transaction that does not contain any of the itemsets being examined (Section 6.3.3). This is illustrated in Example 7.4. Example 7.4 Null-transaction problem with Deﬁnition 7.1. If there are a lot of null-transactions in the data set, then the number of null-transactions rather than the patterns observed may strongly inﬂuence a measure’s assessment as to whether a pattern is negatively correlated. For example, suppose a sewing store sells needle packages A and B. The store sold 100 packages each of A and B, but only one transaction contains both A and B. Intuitively, A is negatively correlated with B since the purchase of one does not seem to encourage the purchase of the other. Let’s see how the above Deﬁnition 7.1 handles this scenario. If there are 200 transactions, we have sup(A ∪B) = 1/200 = 0.005 and sup(A) × sup(B) = 100/200 × 100/200 = 0.25. Thus, sup(A ∪B) ≪sup(A) × sup(B), and so Deﬁnition 7.1 indi- cates that A and B are strongly negatively correlated. What if, instead of only 200 transactions in the database, there are 106? In this case, there are many null- transactions, that is, many contain neither A nor B. How does the deﬁnition hold up? It computes sup(A ∪B) = 1/106 and sup(X) × sup(Y) = 100/106 × 100/106 = 1/108. 7.2 Pattern Mining in Multilevel, Multidimensional Space 293 Thus, sup(A ∪B) ≫sup(X) × sup(Y), which contradicts the earlier ﬁnding even though the number of occurrences of A and B has not changed. The measure in Deﬁnition 7.1 is not null-invariant, where null-invariance is essential for quality interestingness measures as discussed in Section 6.3.3. Deﬁnition 7.2: If X and Y are strongly negatively correlated, then sup(X ∪Y) × sup(X ∪Y) ≫sup(X ∪Y) × sup(X ∪Y). Is this measure null-invariant? □ Example 7.5 Null-transaction problem with Deﬁnition 7.2. Given our needle package example, when there are in total 200 transactions in the database, we have sup(A ∪B) × sup(A ∪B) = 99/200 × 99/200 = 0.245 ≫sup(A ∪B) × sup(A ∪B) = 199/200 × 1/200 ≈0.005, which, according to Deﬁnition 7.2, indicates that A and B are strongly negatively correlated. What if there are 106 transactions in the database? The measure would compute sup(A ∪B) × sup(A ∪B) = 99/106 × 99/106 = 9.8 × 10−9 ≪sup(A ∪B) × sup(A ∪B) = 199/106 × (106 −199)/106 ≈1.99 × 10−4. This time, the measure indicates that A and B are positively correlated, hence, a contradiction. The measure is not null-invariant. As a third alternative, consider Deﬁnition 7.3, which is based on the Kulczynski mea- sure (i.e., the average of conditional probabilities). It follows the spirit of interestingness measures introduced in Section 6.3.3. Deﬁnition 7.3: Suppose that itemsets X and Y are both frequent, that is, sup(X) ≥ min sup and sup(Y) ≥min sup, where min sup is the minimum support threshold. If (P(X|Y) + P(Y|X))/2 < ϵ, where ϵ is a negative pattern threshold, then pattern X ∪Y is a negatively correlated pattern. □ Example 7.6 Negatively correlated patterns using Deﬁnition 7.3, based on the Kulczynski measure. Let’s reexamine our needle package example. Let min sup be 0.01% and ϵ = 0.02. When there are 200 transactions in the database, we have sup(A) = sup(B) = 100/200 = 0.5 > 0.01% and (P(B|A) + P(A|B))/2 = (0.01 + 0.01)/2 < 0.02; thus A and B are negatively correlated. Does this still hold true if we have many more transactions? When there are 106 transactions in the database, the measure computes sup(A) = sup(B) = 100/106 = 0.01% ≥0.01% and (P(B|A) + P(A|B))/2 = (0.01 + 0.01)/2 < 0.02, again indicating that A and B are negatively correlated. This matches our intuition. The measure does not have the null-invariance problem of the ﬁrst two deﬁnitions considered. Let’s examine another case: Suppose that among 100,000 transactions, the store sold 1000 needle packages of A but only 10 packages of B; however, every time package B is 294 Chapter 7 Advanced Pattern Mining sold, package A is also sold (i.e., they appear in the same transaction). In this case, the measure computes (P(B|A) + P(A|B))/2 = (0.01 + 1)/2 = 0.505 ≫0.02, which indi- cates that A and B are positively correlated instead of negatively correlated. This also matches our intuition. With this new deﬁnition of negative correlation, efﬁcient methods can easily be derived for mining negative patterns in large databases. This is left as an exercise for interested readers. 7.3 Constraint-Based Frequent Pattern Mining A data mining process may uncover thousands of rules from a given data set, most of which end up being unrelated or uninteresting to users. Often, users have a good sense of which “direction” of mining may lead to interesting patterns and the “form” of the pat- terns or rules they want to ﬁnd. They may also have a sense of “conditions” for the rules, which would eliminate the discovery of certain rules that they know would not be of interest. Thus, a good heuristic is to have the users specify such intuition or expectations as constraints to conﬁne the search space. This strategy is known as constraint-based mining. The constraints can include the following: Knowledge type constraints: These specify the type of knowledge to be mined, such as association, correlation, classiﬁcation, or clustering. Data constraints: These specify the set of task-relevant data. Dimension/level constraints: These specify the desired dimensions (or attributes) of the data, the abstraction levels, or the level of the concept hierarchies to be used in mining. Interestingness constraints: These specify thresholds on statistical measures of rule interestingness such as support, conﬁdence, and correlation. Rule constraints: These specify the form of, or conditions on, the rules to be mined. Such constraints may be expressed as metarules (rule templates), as the maximum or minimum number of predicates that can occur in the rule antecedent or consequent, or as relationships among attributes, attribute values, and/or aggregates. These constraints can be speciﬁed using a high-level declarative data mining query language and user interface. The ﬁrst four constraint types have already been addressed in earlier sections of this book and this chapter. In this section, we discuss the use of rule constraints to focus the mining task. This form of constraint-based mining allows users to describe the rules that they would like to uncover, thereby making the data mining process more effective. In addition, a sophisticated mining query optimizer can be used to exploit the constraints speciﬁed by the user, thereby making the mining process more efﬁcient. 7.3 Constraint-Based Frequent Pattern Mining 295 Constraint-based mining encourages interactive exploratory mining and analysis. In Section 7.3.1, you will study metarule-guided mining, where syntactic rule constraints are speciﬁed in the form of rule templates. Section 7.3.2 discusses the use of pattern space pruning (which prunes patterns being mined) and data space pruning (which prunes pieces of the data space for which further exploration cannot contribute to the discovery of patterns satisfying the constraints). For pattern space pruning, we introduce three classes of properties that facilitate constraint-based search space pruning: antimonotonicity, monotonicity, and succinct- ness. We also discuss a special class of constraints, called convertible constraints, where by proper data ordering, the constraints can be pushed deep into the iterative mining process and have the same pruning power as monotonic or antimonotonic constraints. For data space pruning, we introduce two classes of properties—data succinctness and data antimonotonicty—and study how they can be integrated within a data mining process. For ease of discussion, we assume that the user is searching for association rules. The procedures presented can be easily extended to the mining of correlation rules by adding a correlation measure of interestingness to the support-conﬁdence framework. 7.3.1 Metarule-Guided Mining of Association Rules “How are metarules useful?” Metarules allow users to specify the syntactic form of rules that they are interested in mining. The rule forms can be used as constraints to help improve the efﬁciency of the mining process. Metarules may be based on the ana- lyst’s experience, expectations, or intuition regarding the data or may be automatically generated based on the database schema. Example 7.7 Metarule-guided mining. Suppose that as a market analyst for AllElectronics you have access to the data describing customers (e.g., customer age, address, and credit rating) as well as the list of customer transactions. You are interested in ﬁnding associations between customer traits and the items that customers buy. However, rather than ﬁnding all of the association rules reﬂecting these relationships, you are interested only in deter- mining which pairs of customer traits promote the sale of ofﬁce software. A metarule can be used to specify this information describing the form of rules you are interested in ﬁnding. An example of such a metarule is P1(X, Y) ∧P2(X, W) ⇒buys(X, “ofﬁce software”), (7.11) where P1 and P2 are predicate variables that are instantiated to attributes from the given database during the mining process, X is a variable representing a customer, and Y and W take on values of the attributes assigned to P1 and P2, respectively. Typically, a user will specify a list of attributes to be considered for instantiation with P1 and P2. Otherwise, a default set may be used. In general, a metarule forms a hypothesis regarding the relationships that the user is interested in probing or conﬁrming. The data mining system can then search for 296 Chapter 7 Advanced Pattern Mining rules that match the given metarule. For instance, Rule (7.12) matches or complies with Metarule (7.11): age(X, “30..39”) ∧income(X, “41K..60K”)⇒buys(X, “ofﬁce software”). (7.12) “How can metarules be used to guide the mining process?” Let’s examine this prob- lem closely. Suppose that we wish to mine interdimensional association rules such as in Example 7.7. A metarule is a rule template of the form P1 ∧P2 ∧··· ∧Pl ⇒Q1 ∧Q2 ∧··· ∧Qr, (7.13) where Pi (i = 1,..., l) and Qj (j = 1,..., r) are either instantiated predicates or predi- cate variables. Let the number of predicates in the metarule be p = l + r. To ﬁnd interdimensional association rules satisfying the template, We need to ﬁnd all frequent p-predicate sets, Lp. We must also have the support or count of the l-predicate subsets of Lp to compute the conﬁdence of rules derived from Lp. This is a typical case of mining multidimensional association rules. By extending such methods using the constraint-pushing techniques described in the following section, we can derive efﬁcient methods for metarule-guided mining. 7.3.2 Constraint-Based Pattern Generation: Pruning Pattern Space and Pruning Data Space Rule constraints specify expected set/subset relationships of the variables in the mined rules, constant initiation of variables, and constraints on aggregate functions and other forms of constraints. Users typically employ their knowledge of the application or data to specify rule constraints for the mining task. These rule constraints may be used together with, or as an alternative to, metarule-guided mining. In this section, we examine rule constraints as to how they can be used to make the mining pro- cess more efﬁcient. Let’s study an example where rule constraints are used to mine hybrid-dimensional association rules. Example 7.8 Constraints for mining association rules. Suppose that AllElectronics has a sales multidimensional database with the following interrelated relations: item(item ID, item name, description, category, price) sales(transaction ID, day, month, year, store ID, city) trans item(item ID, transaction ID) 7.3 Constraint-Based Frequent Pattern Mining 297 Here, the item table contains attributes item ID, item name, description, category, and price; the sales table contains attributes transaction ID day, month, year, store ID, and city; and the two tables are linked via the foreign key attributes, item ID and transaction ID, in the table trans item. Suppose our association mining query is “Find the patterns or rules about the sales of which cheap items (where the sum of the prices is less than $10) may promote (i.e., appear in the same transaction) the sales of which expensive items (where the minimum price is $50), shown in the sales in Chicago in 2010.” This query contains the following four constraints: (1) sum(I.price) < $10, where I represents the item ID of a cheap item; (2) min(J.price) ≥$50), where J represents the item ID of an expensive item; (3) T.city = Chicago; and (4) T.year = 2010, where T represents a transaction ID. For conciseness, we do not show the mining query explicitly here; however, the constraints’ context is clear from the mining query semantics. Dimension/level constraints and interestingness constraints can be applied after mining to ﬁlter out discovered rules, although it is generally more efﬁcient and less expensive to use them during mining to help prune the search space. Dimension/level constraints were discussed in Section 7.2, and interestingness constraints, such as sup- port, conﬁdence, and correlation measures, were discussed in Chapter 6. Let’s focus now on rule constraints. “How can we use rule constraints to prune the search space? More speciﬁcally, what kind of rule constraints can be ‘pushed’ deep into the mining process and still ensure the completeness of the answer returned for a mining query?” In general, an efﬁcient frequent pattern mining processor can prune its search space during mining in two major ways: pruning pattern search space and pruning data search space. The former checks candidate patterns and decides whether a pattern can be pruned. Applying the Apriori property, it prunes a pattern if no superpattern of it can be generated in the remaining mining process. The latter checks the data set to determine whether the particular data piece will be able to contribute to the subsequent generation of satisﬁable patterns (for a particular pattern) in the remaining mining process. If not, the data piece is pruned from further exploration. A constraint that may facilitate pat- tern space pruning is called a pattern pruning constraint, whereas one that can be used for data space pruning is called a data pruning constraint. Pruning Pattern Space with Pattern Pruning Constraints Based on how a constraint may interact with the pattern mining process, there are ﬁve categories of pattern mining constraints: (1) antimonotonic, (2) monotonic, (3) succinct, (4) convertible, and (5) inconvertible. For each category, we use an example to show its characteristics and explain how such kinds of constraints can be used in the mining process. 298 Chapter 7 Advanced Pattern Mining The ﬁrst category of constraints is antimonotonic. Consider the rule constraint “sum(I.price) ≤$100” of Example 7.8. Suppose we are using the Apriori framework, which explores itemsets of size k at the kth iteration. If the price summation of the items in a candidate itemset is no less than $100, this itemset can be pruned from the search space, since adding more items into the set (assuming price is no less than zero) will only make it more expensive and thus will never satisfy the constraint. In other words, if an itemset does not satisfy this rule constraint, none of its supersets can satisfy the constraint. If a rule constraint obeys this property, it is antimonotonic. Pruning by antimonotonic constraints can be applied at each iteration of Apriori-style algo- rithms to help improve the efﬁciency of the overall mining process while guaranteeing completeness of the data mining task. The Apriori property, which states that all nonempty subsets of a frequent itemset must also be frequent, is antimonotonic. If a given itemset does not satisfy minimum support, none of its supersets can. This property is used at each iteration of the Apriori algorithm to reduce the number of candidate itemsets examined, thereby reducing the search space for association rules. Other examples of antimonotonic constraints include “min(J.price) ≥$50,” “count(I) ≤10,” and so on. Any itemset that violates either of these constraints can be discarded since adding more items to such itemsets can never satisfy the constraints. Note that a constraint such as “avg(I.price) ≤$10” is not antimonotonic. For a given itemset that does not satisfy this constraint, a superset created by adding some (cheap) items may result in satisfying the constraint. Hence, pushing this constraint inside the mining process will not guarantee completeness of the data mining task. A list of SQL primitives–based constraints is given in the ﬁrst column of Table 7.2. The antimono- tonicity of the constraints is indicated in the second column. To simplify our discussion, only existence operators (e.g., =, ∈, but not ̸=, /∈) and comparison (or containment) operators with equality (e.g., ≤, ⊆) are given. The second category of constraints is monotonic. If the rule constraint in Example 7.8 were “sum(I.price) ≥$100,” the constraint-based processing method would be quite different. If an itemset I satisﬁes the constraint, that is, the sum of the prices in the set is no less than $100, further addition of more items to I will increase cost and will always satisfy the constraint. Therefore, further testing of this constraint on itemset I becomes redundant. In other words, if an itemset satisﬁes this rule con- straint, so do all of its supersets. If a rule constraint obeys this property, it is monotonic. Similar rule monotonic constraints include “min(I.price) ≤$10,” “count(I) ≥10,” and so on. The monotonicity of the list of SQL primitives–based constraints is indicated in the third column of Table 7.2. The third category is succinct constraints. For this constraints category, we can enumerate all and only those sets that are guaranteed to satisfy the constraint. That is, if a rule constraint is succinct, we can directly generate precisely the sets that satisfy it, even before support counting begins. This avoids the substantial overhead of the generate-and-test paradigm. In other words, such constraints are precounting prunable. For example, the constraint “min(J.price) ≥$50” in Example 7.8 is succinct because we can explicitly and precisely generate all the itemsets that satisfy the constraint. 7.3 Constraint-Based Frequent Pattern Mining 299 Table 7.2 Characterization of Commonly Used SQL-Based Pattern Pruning Constraints Constraint Antimonotonic Monotonic Succinct v ∈S no yes yes S ⊇V no yes yes S ⊆V yes no yes min(S) ≤v no yes yes min(S) ≥v yes no yes max(S) ≤v yes no yes max(S) ≥v no yes yes count(S) ≤v yes no weakly count(S) ≥v no yes weakly sum(S) ≤v (∀a ∈S, a ≥0) yes no no sum(S) ≥v (∀a ∈S, a ≥0) no yes no range(S) ≤v yes no no range(S) ≥v no yes no avg(S) θ v, θ ∈{≤, ≥} convertible convertible no support(S) ≥ξ yes no no support(S) ≤ξ no yes no all conﬁdence(S) ≥ξ yes no no all conﬁdence(S) ≤ξ no yes no Speciﬁcally, such a set must consist of a nonempty set of items that have a price no less than $50. It is of the form S, where S ̸= ∅is a subset of the set of all items with prices no less than $50. Because there is a precise “formula” for generating all the sets satisfying a succinct constraint, there is no need to iteratively check the rule constraint during the mining process. The succinctness of the list of SQL primitives–based constraints is indicated in the fourth column of Table 7.2.2 The fourth category is convertible constraints. Some constraints belong to none of the previous three categories. However, if the items in the itemset are arranged in a par- ticular order, the constraint may become monotonic or antimonotonic with regard to the frequent itemset mining process. For example, the constraint “avg(I.price) ≤$10” is neither antimonotonic nor monotonic. However, if items in a transaction are added to an itemset in price-ascending order, the constraint becomes antimonotonic, because if an itemset I violates the constraint (i.e., with an average price greater than $10), then further addition of more expensive items into the itemset will never make it 2For constraint count(S) ≤v (and similarly for count(S) ≥v), we can have a member generation func- tion based on a cardinality constraint (i.e., {X | X ⊆Itemset ∧|X| ≤v}). Member generation in this manner is of a different ﬂavor and thus is called weakly succinct. 300 Chapter 7 Advanced Pattern Mining satisfy the constraint. Similarly, if items in a transaction are added to an itemset in price-descending order, it becomes monotonic, because if the itemset satisﬁes the con- straint (i.e., with an average price no greater than $10), then adding cheaper items into the current itemset will still make the average price no greater than $10. Aside from “avg(S) ≤v” and “avg(S) ≥v,” given in Table 7.2, there are many other convertible constraints such as “variance(S) ≥v” “standard deviation(S) ≥v,” and so on. Note that the previous discussion does not imply that every constraint is convertible. For example, “sum(S)θv,” where θ ∈{≤, ≥} and each element in S could be of any real value, is not convertible. Therefore, there is yet a ﬁfth category of constraints, called inconvertible constraints. The good news is that although there still exist some tough constraints that are not convertible, most simple SQL expressions with built-in SQL aggregates belong to one of the ﬁrst four categories to which efﬁcient constraint mining methods can be applied. Pruning Data Space with Data Pruning Constraints The second way of search space pruning in constraint-based frequent pattern mining is pruning data space. This strategy prunes pieces of data if they will not contribute to the subsequent generation of satisﬁable patterns in the mining process. We consider two properties: data succinctness and data antimonotonicity. Constraints are data-succinct if they can be used at the beginning of a pattern mining process to prune the data subsets that cannot satisfy the constraints. For example, if a mining query requires that the mined pattern must contain digital camera, then any transaction that does not contain digital camera can be pruned at the beginning of the mining process, which effectively reduces the data set to be examined. Interestingly, many constraints are data-antimonotonic in the sense that during the mining process, if a data entry cannot satisfy a data-antimonotonic constraint based on the current pattern, then it can be pruned. We prune it because it will not be able to contribute to the generation of any superpattern of the current pattern in the remaining mining process. Example 7.9 Data antimonotonicity. A mining query requires that C1 : sum(I.price) ≥$100, that is, the sum of the prices of the items in the mined pattern must be no less than $100. Sup- pose that the current frequent itemset, S, does not satisfy constraint C1 (say, because the sum of the prices of the items in S is $50). If the remaining frequent items in a transac- tion Ti are such that, say, {i2.price = $5,i5.price = $10,i8.price = $20}, then Ti will not be able to make S satisfy the constraint. Thus, Ti cannot contribute to the patterns to be mined from S, and thus can be pruned. Note that such pruning cannot be done at the beginning of the mining because at that time, we do not know yet if the total sum of the prices of all the items in Ti will be over $100 (e.g., we may have i3.price = $80). However, during the iterative mining process, we may ﬁnd some items (e.g., i3) that are not frequent with S in the transaction data set, and thus they would be pruned. Therefore, such checking and pruning should be enforced at each iteration to reduce the data search space. 7.4 Mining High-Dimensional Data and Colossal Patterns 301 Notice that constraint C1 is a monotonic constraint with respect to pattern space pruning. As we have seen, this constraint has very limited power for reducing the search space in pattern pruning. However, the same constraint can be used for effective reduction of the data search space. For an antimonotonic constraint, such as C2 : sum(I.price) ≤$100, we can prune both pattern and data search spaces at the same time. Based on our study of pattern pruning, we already know that the current itemset can be pruned if the sum of the prices in it is over $100 (since its further expansion can never satisfy C2). At the same time, we can also prune any remaining items in a transaction Ti that cannot make the constraint C2 valid. For example, if the sum of the prices of items in the current itemset S is $90, any patterns over $10 in the remaining frequent items in Ti can be pruned. If none of the remaining items in Ti can make the constraint valid, the entire transaction Ti should be pruned. Consider pattern constraints that are neither antimonotonic nor monotonic such as “C3 : avg(I.price) ≤10.” These can be data-antimonotonic because if the remaining items in a transaction Ti cannot make the constraint valid, then Ti can be pruned as well. Therefore, data-antimonotonic constraints can be quite useful for constraint-based data space pruning. Notice that search space pruning by data antimonotonicity is conﬁned only to a pat- tern growth–based mining algorithm because the pruning of a data entry is determined based on whether it can contribute to a speciﬁc pattern. Data antimonotonicity cannot be used for pruning the data space if the Apriori algorithm is used because the data are associated with all of the currently active patterns. At any iteration, there are usu- ally many active patterns. A data entry that cannot contribute to the formation of the superpatterns of a given pattern may still be able to contribute to the superpattern of other active patterns. Thus, the power of data space pruning can be very limited for nonpattern growth–based algorithms. 7.4 Mining High-Dimensional Data and Colossal Patterns The frequent pattern mining methods presented so far handle large data sets having a small number of dimensions. However, some applications may need to mine high- dimensional data (i.e., data with hundreds or thousands of dimensions). Can we use the methods studied so far to mine high-dimensional data? The answer is unfortunately negative because the search spaces of such typical methods grow exponentially with the number of dimensions. Researchers have overcome this difﬁculty in two directions. One direction extends a pattern growth approach by further exploring the vertical data format to handle data sets with a large number of dimensions (also called features or items, e.g., genes) but a small number of rows (also called transactions or tuples, e.g., samples). This is use- ful in applications like the analysis of gene expressions in bioinformatics, for example, where we often need to analyze microarray data that contain a large number of genes 302 Chapter 7 Advanced Pattern Mining (e.g., 10,000 to 100,000) but only a small number of samples (e.g., 100 to 1000). The other direction develops a new mining methodology, called Pattern-Fusion, which mines colossal patterns, that is, patterns of very long length. Let’s ﬁrst brieﬂy examine the ﬁrst direction, in particular, a pattern growth–based row enumeration approach. Its general philosophy is to explore the vertical data format, as described in Section 6.2.5, which is also known as row enumeration. Row enumeration differs from traditional column (i.e., item) enumeration (also known as the horizon- tal data format). In traditional column enumeration, the data set, D, is viewed as a set of rows, where each row consists of an itemset. In row enumeration, the data set is instead viewed as an itemset, each consisting of a set of row IDs indicating where the item appears in the traditional view of D. The original data set, D, can easily be trans- formed into a transposed data set, T. A data set with a small number of rows but a large number of dimensions is then transformed into a transposed data set with a large num- ber of rows but a small number of dimensions. Efﬁcient pattern growth methods can then be developed on such relatively low-dimensional data sets. The details of such an approach are left as an exercise for interested readers. The remainder of this section focuses on the second direction. We introduce Pattern- Fusion, a new mining methodology that mines colossal patterns (i.e., patterns of very long length). This method takes leaps in the pattern search space, leading to a good approximation of the complete set of colossal frequent patterns. 7.4.1 Mining Colossal Patterns by Pattern-Fusion Although we have studied methods for mining frequent patterns in various situations, many applications have hidden patterns that are tough to mine, due mainly to their immense length or size. Consider bioinformatics, for example, where a common activ- ity