8.1’s data) are one approach to improving the scalability of decision tree induction. BOAT can use any attribute selection measure that selects binary splits and that is based on the notion of purity of partitions such as the Gini index. BOAT uses a lower bound on the attribute selection measure to detect if this “very good” tree, T′, is different from the “real” tree, T, that would have been generated using all of the data. It reﬁnes T′ to arrive at T. BOAT usually requires only two scans of D. This is quite an improvement, even in comparison to traditional decision tree algorithms (e.g., the basic algorithm in Figure 8.3), which require one scan per tree level! BOAT was found to be two to three times faster than RainForest, while constructing exactly the same tree. An additional advantage of BOAT is that it can be used for incremental updates. That is, BOAT can take new insertions and deletions for the training data and update the decision tree to reﬂect these changes, without having to reconstruct the tree from scratch. 8.2.5 Visual Mining for Decision Tree Induction “Are there any interactive approaches to decision tree induction that allow us to visual- ize the data and the tree as it is being constructed? Can we use any knowledge of our data to help in building the tree?” In this section, you will learn about an approach to decision tree induction that supports these options. Perception-based classiﬁcation (PBC) is an interactive approach based on multidimensional visualization techniques and allows the user to incorporate background knowledge about the data when building a decision tree. By visually interacting with the data, the user is also likely to develop a deeper understanding of the data. The resulting trees tend to be smaller than those built using traditional decision tree induction methods and so are easier to interpret, while achieving about the same accuracy. “How can the data be visualized to support interactive decision tree construction?” PBC uses a pixel-oriented approach to view multidimensional data with its class label 8.2 Decision Tree Induction 349 information. The circle segments approach is adapted, which maps d-dimensional data objects to a circle that is partitioned into d segments, each representing one attribute (Section 2.3.1). Here, an attribute value of a data object is mapped to one colored pixel, reﬂecting the object’s class label. This mapping is done for each attribute–value pair of each data object. Sorting is done for each attribute to determine the arrangement order within a segment. For example, attribute values within a given segment may be orga- nized so as to display homogeneous (with respect to class label) regions within the same attribute value. The amount of training data that can be visualized at one time is approx- imately determined by the product of the number of attributes and the number of data objects. The PBC system displays a split screen, consisting of a Data Interaction window and a Knowledge Interaction window (Figure 8.9). The Data Interaction window displays the circle segments of the data under examination, while the Knowledge Interaction window displays the decision tree constructed so far. Initially, the complete training set is visualized in the Data Interaction window, while the Knowledge Interaction window displays an empty decision tree. Traditional decision tree algorithms allow only binary splits for numeric attributes. PBC, however, allows the user to specify multiple split-points, resulting in multiple branches to be grown from a single tree node. Figure 8.9 A screenshot of PBC, a system for interactive decision tree construction. Multidimensional training data are viewed as circle segments in the Data Interaction window (left). The Know- ledge Interaction window (right) displays the current decision tree. Source: From Ankerst, Elsen, Ester, and Kriegel [AEEK99]. 350 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts A tree is interactively constructed as follows. The user visualizes the multidimen- sional data in the Data Interaction window and selects a splitting attribute and one or more split-points. The current decision tree in the Knowledge Interaction window is expanded. The user selects a node of the decision tree. The user may either assign a class label to the node (which makes the node a leaf) or request the visualization of the train- ing data corresponding to the node. This leads to a new visualization of every attribute except the ones used for splitting criteria on the same path from the root. The interactive process continues until a class has been assigned to each leaf of the decision tree. The trees constructed with PBC were compared with trees generated by the CART, C4.5, and SPRINT algorithms from various data sets. The trees created with PBC were of comparable accuracy with the tree from the algorithmic approaches, yet were signiﬁ- cantly smaller and, thus, easier to understand. Users can use their domain knowledge in building a decision tree, but also gain a deeper understanding of their data during the construction process. 8.3 Bayes Classiﬁcation Methods “What are Bayesian classiﬁers?” Bayesian classiﬁers are statistical classiﬁers. They can predict class membership probabilities such as the probability that a given tuple belongs to a particular class. Bayesian classiﬁcation is based on Bayes’ theorem, described next. Studies compar- ing classiﬁcation algorithms have found a simple Bayesian classiﬁer known as the na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁer to be comparable in performance with decision tree and selected neu- ral network classiﬁers. Bayesian classiﬁers have also exhibited high accuracy and speed when applied to large databases. Na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁers assume that the effect of an attribute value on a given class is independent of the values of the other attributes. This assumption is called class- conditional independence. It is made to simplify the computations involved and, in this sense, is considered “na¨ıve.” Section 8.3.1 reviews basic probability notation and Bayes’ theorem. In Section 8.3.2 you will learn how to do na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁcation. 8.3.1 Bayes’ Theorem Bayes’ theorem is named after Thomas Bayes, a nonconformist English clergyman who did early work in probability and decision theory during the 18th century. Let X be a data tuple. In Bayesian terms, X is considered “evidence.” As usual, it is described by measurements made on a set of n attributes. Let H be some hypothesis such as that the data tuple X belongs to a speciﬁed class C. For classiﬁcation problems, we want to determine P(H|X), the probability that the hypothesis H holds given the “evidence” or observed data tuple X. In other words, we are looking for the probability that tuple X belongs to class C, given that we know the attribute description of X. 8.3 Bayes Classiﬁcation Methods 351 P(H|X) is the posterior probability, or a posteriori probability, of H conditioned on X. For example, suppose our world of data tuples is conﬁned to customers described by the attributes age and income, respectively, and that X is a 35-year-old customer with an income of $40,000. Suppose that H is the hypothesis that our customer will buy a computer. Then P(H|X) reﬂects the probability that customer X will buy a computer given that we know the customer’s age and income. In contrast, P(H) is the prior probability, or a priori probability, of H. For our exam- ple, this is the probability that any given customer will buy a computer, regardless of age, income, or any other information, for that matter. The posterior probability, P(H|X), is based on more information (e.g., customer information) than the prior probability, P(H), which is independent of X. Similarly, P(X|H) is the posterior probability of X conditioned on H. That is, it is the probability that a customer, X, is 35 years old and earns $40,000, given that we know the customer will buy a computer. P(X) is the prior probability of X. Using our example, it is the probability that a person from our set of customers is 35 years old and earns $40,000. “How are these probabilities estimated?” P(H), P(X|H), and P(X) may be estimated from the given data, as we shall see next. Bayes’ theorem is useful in that it provides a way of calculating the posterior probability, P(H|X), from P(H), P(X|H), and P(X). Bayes’ theorem is P(H|X) = P(X|H)P(H) P(X) . (8.10) Now that we have that out of the way, in the next section, we will look at how Bayes’ theorem is used in the na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁer. 8.3.2 Na¨ıve Bayesian Classiﬁcation The na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁer, or simple Bayesian classiﬁer, works as follows: 1. Let D be a training set of tuples and their associated class labels. As usual, each tuple is represented by an n-dimensional attribute vector, X = (x1, x2,..., xn), depicting n measurements made on the tuple from n attributes, respectively, A1, A2,..., An. 2. Suppose that there are m classes, C1, C2,..., Cm. Given a tuple, X, the classiﬁer will predict that X belongs to the class having the highest posterior probability, condi- tioned on X. That is, the na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁer predicts that tuple X belongs to the class Ci if and only if P(Ci|X) > P(Cj|X) for 1 ≤j ≤m,j ̸= i. Thus, we maximize P(Ci|X). The class Ci for which P(Ci|X) is maximized is called the maximum posteriori hypothesis. By Bayes’ theorem (Eq. 8.10), P(Ci|X) = P(X|Ci)P(Ci) P(X) . (8.11) 352 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts 3. As P(X) is constant for all classes, only P(X|Ci)P(Ci) needs to be maximized. If the class prior probabilities are not known, then it is commonly assumed that the classes are equally likely, that is, P(C1) = P(C2) = ··· = P(Cm), and we would therefore maximize P(X|Ci). Otherwise, we maximize P(X|Ci)P(Ci). Note that the class prior probabilities may be estimated by P(Ci) = |Ci,D|/|D|, where |Ci,D| is the number of training tuples of class Ci in D. 4. Given data sets with many attributes, it would be extremely computationally expensive to compute P(X|Ci). To reduce computation in evaluating P(X|Ci), the na¨ıve assumption of class-conditional independence is made. This presumes that the attributes’ values are conditionally independent of one another, given the class label of the tuple (i.e., that there are no dependence relationships among the attributes). Thus, P(X|Ci) = n Y k=1 P(xk|Ci) (8.12) = P(x1|Ci) × P(x2|Ci) × ··· × P(xn|Ci). We can easily estimate the probabilities P(x1|Ci), P(x2|Ci),..., P(xn|Ci) from the training tuples. Recall that here xk refers to the value of attribute Ak for tuple X. For each attribute, we look at whether the attribute is categorical or continuous-valued. For instance, to compute P(X|Ci), we consider the following: (a) If Ak is categorical, then P(xk|Ci) is the number of tuples of class Ci in D having the value xk for Ak, divided by |Ci,D|, the number of tuples of class Ci in D. (b) If Ak is continuous-valued, then we need to do a bit more work, but the cal- culation is pretty straightforward. A continuous-valued attribute is typically assumed to have a Gaussian distribution with a mean µ and standard deviation σ, deﬁned by g(x, µ, σ) = 1 √ 2πσ e−(x−µ)2 2σ2 , (8.13) so that P(xk|Ci) = g(xk, µCi, σCi). (8.14) These equations may appear daunting, but hold on! We need to compute µCi and σCi, which are the mean (i.e., average) and standard deviation, respectively, of the values of attribute Ak for training tuples of class Ci. We then plug these two quantities into Eq. (8.13), together with xk, to estimate P(xk|Ci). For example, let X = (35,$40,000), where A1 and A2 are the attributes age and income, respectively. Let the class label attribute be buys computer. The associated class label for X is yes (i.e., buys computer = yes). Let’s suppose that age has not been discretized and therefore exists as a continuous-valued attribute. Suppose that from the training set, we ﬁnd that customers in D who buy a computer are 8.3 Bayes Classiﬁcation Methods 353 38 ± 12 years of age. In other words, for attribute age and this class, we have µ = 38 years and σ = 12. We can plug these quantities, along with x1 = 35 for our tuple X, into Eq. (8.13) to estimate P(age = 35|buys computer = yes). For a quick review of mean and standard deviation calculations, please see Section 2.2. 5. To predict the class label of X, P(X|Ci)P(Ci) is evaluated for each class Ci. The classiﬁer predicts that the class label of tuple X is the class Ci if and only if P(X|Ci)P(Ci) > P(X|Cj)P(Cj) for 1 ≤j ≤m, j ̸= i. (8.15) In other words, the predicted class label is the class Ci for which P(X|Ci)P(Ci) is the maximum. “How effective are Bayesian classiﬁers?” Various empirical studies of this classiﬁer in comparison to decision tree and neural network classiﬁers have found it to be com- parable in some domains. In theory, Bayesian classiﬁers have the minimum error rate in comparison to all other classiﬁers. However, in practice this is not always the case, owing to inaccuracies in the assumptions made for its use, such as class-conditional independence, and the lack of available probability data. Bayesian classiﬁers are also useful in that they provide a theoretical justiﬁcation for other classiﬁers that do not explicitly use Bayes’ theorem. For example, under certain assumptions, it can be shown that many neural network and curve-ﬁtting algorithms output the maximum posteriori hypothesis, as does the na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁer. Example 8.4 Predicting a class label using na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁcation. We wish to predict the class label of a tuple using na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁcation, given the same training data as in Example 8.3 for decision tree induction. The training data were shown earlier in Table 8.1. The data tuples are described by the attributes age, income, student, and credit rating. The class label attribute, buys computer, has two distinct values (namely, {yes, no}). Let C1 correspond to the class buys computer = yes and C2 correspond to buys computer = no. The tuple we wish to classify is X = (age = youth, income = medium, student = yes, credit rating = fair) We need to maximize P(X|Ci)P(Ci), for i = 1, 2. P(Ci), the prior probability of each class, can be computed based on the training tuples: P(buys computer = yes) = 9/14 = 0.643 P(buys computer = no) = 5/14 = 0.357 To compute P(X|Ci), for i = 1, 2, we compute the following conditional probabilities: P(age = youth | buys computer = yes) = 2/9 = 0.222 P(age = youth | buys computer = no) = 3/5 = 0.600 P(income = medium | buys computer = yes) = 4/9 = 0.444 P(income = medium | buys computer = no) = 2/5 = 0.400 P(student = yes | buys computer = yes) = 6/9 = 0.667 354 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts P(student = yes | buys computer = no) = 1/5 = 0.200 P(credit rating = fair | buys computer = yes) = 6/9 = 0.667 P(credit rating = fair | buys computer = no) = 2/5 = 0.400 Using these probabilities, we obtain P(X|buys computer = yes) = P(age = youth | buys computer = yes) × P(income = medium | buys computer = yes) × P(student = yes | buys computer = yes) × P(credit rating = fair | buys computer = yes) = 0.222 × 0.444 × 0.667 × 0.667 = 0.044. Similarly, P(X|buys computer = no) = 0.600 × 0.400 × 0.200 × 0.400 = 0.019. To ﬁnd the class, Ci, that maximizes P(X|Ci)P(Ci), we compute P(X|buys computer = yes)P(buys computer = yes) = 0.044 × 0.643 = 0.028 P(X|buys computer = no)P(buys computer = no) = 0.019 × 0.357 = 0.007 Therefore, the na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁer predicts buys computer = yes for tuple X. “What if I encounter probability values of zero?” Recall that in Eq. (8.12), we esti- mate P(X|Ci) as the product of the probabilities P(x1|Ci), P(x2|Ci),..., P(xn|Ci), based on the assumption of class-conditional independence. These probabilities can be esti- mated from the training tuples (step 4). We need to compute P(X|Ci) for each class (i = 1,2,...,m) to ﬁnd the class Ci for which P(X|Ci)P(Ci) is the maximum (step 5). Let’s consider this calculation. For each attribute–value pair (i.e., Ak = xk, for k = 1,2,...,n) in tuple X, we need to count the number of tuples having that attribute–value pair, per class (i.e., per Ci, for i = 1,..., m). In Example 8.4, we have two classes (m = 2), namely buys computer = yes and buys computer = no. Therefore, for the attribute–value pair student = yes of X, say, we need two counts—the number of customers who are students and for which buys computer = yes (which contributes to P(X|buys computer = yes)) and the number of customers who are students and for which buys computer = no (which contributes to P(X|buys computer = no)). But what if, say, there are no training tuples representing students for the class buys computer = no, resulting in P(student = yes|buys computer = no) = 0? In other words, what happens if we should end up with a probability value of zero for some P(xk|Ci)? Plugging this zero value into Eq. (8.12) would return a zero probability for P(X|Ci), even though, without the zero probability, we may have ended up with a high probability, suggesting that X belonged to class Ci! A zero probability cancels the effects of all the other (posteriori) probabilities (on Ci) involved in the product. There is a simple trick to avoid this problem. We can assume that our training data- base, D, is so large that adding one to each count that we need would only make a negligible difference in the estimated probability value, yet would conveniently avoid the 8.4 Rule-Based Classiﬁcation 355 case of probability values of zero. This technique for probability estimation is known as the Laplacian correction or Laplace estimator, named after Pierre Laplace, a French mathematician who lived from 1749 to 1827. If we have, say, q counts to which we each add one, then we must remember to add q to the corresponding denominator used in the probability calculation. We illustrate this technique in Example 8.5. Example 8.5 Using the Laplacian correction to avoid computing probability values of zero. Sup- pose that for the class buys computer = yes in some training database, D, containing 1000 tuples, we have 0 tuples with income = low, 990 tuples with income = medium, and 10 tuples with income = high. The probabilities of these events, without the Laplacian correction, are 0, 0.990 (from 990/1000), and 0.010 (from 10/1000), respectively. Using the Laplacian correction for the three quantities, we pretend that we have 1 more tuple for each income-value pair. In this way, we instead obtain the following probabilities (rounded up to three decimal places): 1 1003 = 0.001, 991 1003 = 0.988, and 11 1003 = 0.011, respectively. The “corrected” probability estimates are close to their “uncorrected” counterparts, yet the zero probability value is avoided. 8.4 Rule-Based Classiﬁcation In this section, we look at rule-based classiﬁers, where the learned model is represented as a set of IF-THEN rules. We ﬁrst examine how such rules are used for classiﬁcation (Section 8.4.1). We then study ways in which they can be generated, either from a deci- sion tree (Section 8.4.2) or directly from the training data using a sequential covering algorithm (Section 8.4.3). 8.4.1 Using IF-THEN Rules for Classiﬁcation Rules are a good way of representing information or bits of knowledge. A rule-based classiﬁer uses a set of IF-THEN rules for classiﬁcation. An IF-THEN rule is an expres- sion of the form IF condition THEN conclusion. An example is rule R1, R1: IF age = youth AND student = yes THEN buys computer = yes. The “IF” part (or left side) of a rule is known as the rule antecedent or precondition. The “THEN” part (or right side) is the rule consequent. In the rule antecedent, the condition consists of one or more attribute tests (e.g., age = youth and student = yes) 356 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts that are logically ANDed. The rule’s consequent contains a class prediction (in this case, we are predicting whether a customer will buy a computer). R1 can also be written as R1: (age = youth) ∧(student = yes) ⇒(buys computer = yes). If the condition (i.e., all the attribute tests) in a rule antecedent holds true for a given tuple, we say that the rule antecedent is satisﬁed (or simply, that the rule is satisﬁed) and that the rule covers the tuple. A rule R can be assessed by its coverage and accuracy. Given a tuple, X, from a class- labeled data set, D, let ncovers be the number of tuples covered by R; ncorrect be the number of tuples correctly classiﬁed by R; and |D| be the number of tuples in D. We can deﬁne the coverage and accuracy of R as coverage(R) = ncovers |D| (8.16) accuracy(R) = ncorrect ncovers . (8.17) That is, a rule’s coverage is the percentage of tuples that are covered by the rule (i.e., their attribute values hold true for the rule’s antecedent). For a rule’s accuracy, we look at the tuples that it covers and see what percentage of them the rule can correctly classify. Example 8.6 Rule accuracy and coverage. Let’s go back to our data in Table 8.1. These are class- labeled tuples from the AllElectronics customer database. Our task is to predict whether a customer will buy a computer. Consider rule R1, which covers 2 of the 14 tuples. It can correctly classify both tuples. Therefore, coverage(R1) = 2/14 = 14.28% and accuracy(R1) = 2/2 = 100%. Let’s see how we can use rule-based classiﬁcation to predict the class label of a given tuple, X. If a rule is satisﬁed by X, the rule is said to be triggered. For example, suppose we have X= (age = youth, income = medium, student = yes, credit rating = fair). We would like to classify X according to buys computer. X satisﬁes R1, which triggers the rule. If R1 is the only rule satisﬁed, then the rule ﬁres by returning the class prediction for X. Note that triggering does not always mean ﬁring because there may be more than one rule that is satisﬁed! If more than one rule is triggered, we have a potential problem. What if they each specify a different class? Or what if no rule is satisﬁed by X? We tackle the ﬁrst question. If more than one rule is triggered, we need a conﬂict resolution strategy to ﬁgure out which rule gets to ﬁre and assign its class prediction to X. There are many possible strategies. We look at two, namely size ordering and rule ordering. 8.4 Rule-Based Classiﬁcation 357 The size ordering scheme assigns the highest priority to the triggering rule that has the “toughest” requirements, where toughness is measured by the rule antecedent size. That is, the triggering rule with the most attribute tests is ﬁred. The rule ordering scheme prioritizes the rules beforehand. The ordering may be class-based or rule-based. With class-based ordering, the classes are sorted in order of decreasing “importance” such as by decreasing order of prevalence. That is, all the rules for the most prevalent (or most frequent) class come ﬁrst, the rules for the next prevalent class come next, and so on. Alternatively, they may be sorted based on the misclassiﬁca- tion cost per class. Within each class, the rules are not ordered—they don’t have to be because they all predict the same class (and so there can be no class conﬂict!). With rule-based ordering, the rules are organized into one long priority list, accord- ing to some measure of rule quality, such as accuracy, coverage, or size (number of attribute tests in the rule antecedent), or based on advice from domain experts. When rule ordering is used, the rule set is known as a decision list. With rule ordering, the trig- gering rule that appears earliest in the list has the highest priority, and so it gets to ﬁre its class prediction. Any other rule that satisﬁes X is ignored. Most rule-based classiﬁcation systems use a class-based rule-ordering strategy. Note that in the ﬁrst strategy, overall the rules are unordered. They can be applied in any order when classifying a tuple. That is, a disjunction (logical OR) is implied between each of the rules. Each rule represents a standalone nugget or piece of knowledge. This is in contrast to the rule ordering (decision list) scheme for which rules must be applied in the prescribed order so as to avoid conﬂicts. Each rule in a decision list implies the negation of the rules that come before it in the list. Hence, rules in a decision list are more difﬁcult to interpret. Now that we have seen how we can handle conﬂicts, let’s go back to the scenario where there is no rule satisﬁed by X. How, then, can we determine the class label of X? In this case, a fallback or default rule can be set up to specify a default class, based on a training set. This may be the class in majority or the majority class of the tuples that were not covered by any rule. The default rule is evaluated at the end, if and only if no other rule covers X. The condition in the default rule is empty. In this way, the rule ﬁres when no other rule is satisﬁed. In the following sections, we examine how to build a rule-based classiﬁer. 8.4.2 Rule Extraction from a Decision Tree In Section 8.2, we learned how to build a decision tree classiﬁer from a set of training data. Decision tree classiﬁers are a popular method of classiﬁcation—it is easy to under- stand how decision trees work and they are known for their accuracy. Decision trees can become large and difﬁcult to interpret. In this subsection, we look at how to build a rule- based classiﬁer by extracting IF-THEN rules from a decision tree. In comparison with a decision tree, the IF-THEN rules may be easier for humans to understand, particularly if the decision tree is very large. To extract rules from a decision tree, one rule is created for each path from the root to a leaf node. Each splitting criterion along a given path is logically ANDed to form the 358 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts rule antecedent (“IF” part). The leaf node holds the class prediction, forming the rule consequent (“THEN” part). Example 8.7 Extracting classiﬁcation rules from a decision tree. The decision tree of Figure 8.2 can be converted to classiﬁcation IF-THEN rules by tracing the path from the root node to each leaf node in the tree. The rules extracted from Figure 8.2 are as follows: R1: IF age = youth AND student = no THEN buys computer = no R2: IF age = youth AND student = yes THEN buys computer = yes R3: IF age = middle aged THEN buys computer = yes R4: IF age = senior AND credit rating = excellent THEN buys computer = yes R5: IF age = senior AND credit rating = fair THEN buys computer = no A disjunction (logical OR) is implied between each of the extracted rules. Because the rules are extracted directly from the tree, they are mutually exclusive and exhaustive. Mutually exclusive means that we cannot have rule conﬂicts here because no two rules will be triggered for the same tuple. (We have one rule per leaf, and any tuple can map to only one leaf.) Exhaustive means there is one rule for each possible attribute–value combination, so that this set of rules does not require a default rule. Therefore, the order of the rules does not matter—they are unordered. Since we end up with one rule per leaf, the set of extracted rules is not much simpler than the corresponding decision tree! The extracted rules may be even more difﬁcult to interpret than the original trees in some cases. As an example, Figure 8.7 showed decision trees that suffer from subtree repetition and replication. The resulting set of rules extracted can be large and difﬁcult to follow, because some of the attribute tests may be irrelevant or redundant. So, the plot thickens. Although it is easy to extract rules from a decision tree, we may need to do some more work by pruning the resulting rule set. “How can we prune the rule set?” For a given rule antecedent, any condition that does not improve the estimated accuracy of the rule can be pruned (i.e., removed), thereby generalizing the rule. C4.5 extracts rules from an unpruned tree, and then prunes the rules using a pessimistic approach similar to its tree pruning method. The training tuples and their associated class labels are used to estimate rule accuracy. However, because this would result in an optimistic estimate, alternatively, the estimate is adjusted to compen- sate for the bias, resulting in a pessimistic estimate. In addition, any rule that does not contribute to the overall accuracy of the entire rule set can also be pruned. Other problems arise during rule pruning, however, as the rules will no longer be mutually exclusive and exhaustive. For conﬂict resolution, C4.5 adopts a class-based ordering scheme. It groups together all rules for a single class, and then determines a ranking of these class rule sets. Within a rule set, the rules are not ordered. C4.5 orders the class rule sets so as to minimize the number of false-positive errors (i.e., where a rule predicts a class, C, but the actual class is not C). The class rule set with the least number of false positives is examined ﬁrst. Once pruning is complete, a ﬁnal check is 8.4 Rule-Based Classiﬁcation 359 done to remove any duplicates. When choosing a default class, C4.5 does not choose the majority class, because this class will likely have many rules for its tuples. Instead, it selects the class that contains the most training tuples that were not covered by any rule. 8.4.3 Rule Induction Using a Sequential Covering Algorithm IF-THEN rules can be extracted directly from the training data (i.e., without having to generate a decision tree ﬁrst) using a sequential covering algorithm. The name comes from the notion that the rules are learned sequentially (one at a time), where each rule for a given class will ideally cover many of the class’s tuples (and hopefully none of the tuples of other classes). Sequential covering algorithms are the most widely used approach to mining disjunctive sets of classiﬁcation rules, and form the topic of this subsection. There are many sequential covering algorithms. Popular variations include AQ, CN2, and the more recent RIPPER. The general strategy is as follows. Rules are learned one at a time. Each time a rule is learned, the tuples covered by the rule are removed, and the process repeats on the remaining tuples. This sequential learning of rules is in contrast to decision tree induction. Because the path to each leaf in a decision tree corresponds to a rule, we can consider decision tree induction as learning a set of rules simultaneously. A basic sequential covering algorithm is shown in Figure 8.10. Here, rules are learned for one class at a time. Ideally, when learning a rule for a class, C, we would like the rule to cover all (or many) of the training tuples of class C and none (or few) of the tuples Algorithm: Sequential covering. Learn a set of IF-THEN rules for classiﬁcation. Input: D, a data set of class-labeled tuples; Att vals, the set of all attributes and their possible values. Output: A set of IF-THEN rules. Method: (1) Rule set = {}; // initial set of rules learned is empty (2) for each class c do (3) repeat (4) Rule = Learn One Rule(D, Att vals, c); (5) remove tuples covered by Rule from D; (6) Rule set = Rule set + Rule; // add new rule to rule set (7) until terminating condition; (8) endfor (9) return Rule Set; Figure 8.10 Basic sequential covering algorithm. 360 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts from other classes. In this way, the rules learned should be of high accuracy. The rules need not necessarily be of high coverage. This is because we can have more than one rule for a class, so that different rules may cover different tuples within the same class. The process continues until the terminating condition is met, such as when there are no more training tuples or the quality of a rule returned is below a user-speciﬁed threshold. The Learn One Rule procedure ﬁnds the “best” rule for the current class, given the current set of training tuples. “How are rules learned?” Typically, rules are grown in a general-to-speciﬁc manner (Figure 8.11). We can think of this as a beam search, where we start off with an empty rule and then gradually keep appending attribute tests to it. We append by adding the attribute test as a logical conjunct to the existing condition of the rule antecedent. Sup- pose our training set, D, consists of loan application data. Attributes regarding each applicant include their age, income, education level, residence, credit rating, and the term of the loan. The classifying attribute is loan decision, which indicates whether a loan is accepted (considered safe) or rejected (considered risky). To learn a rule for the class “accept,” we start off with the most general rule possible, that is, the condition of the rule antecedent is empty. The rule is IF THEN loan decision = accept. We then consider each possible attribute test that may be added to the rule. These can be derived from the parameter Att vals, which contains a list of attributes with their associated values. For example, for an attribute–value pair (att, val), we can consider attribute tests such as att = val, att ≤val, att > val, and so on. Typically, the training data will contain many attributes, each of which may have several possible values. Find- ing an optimal rule set becomes computationally explosive. Instead, Learn One Rule IF THEN loan_decision  accept IF loan_term  short THEN loan_decision  accept IF loan_term  long THEN loan_decision accept IF income high THEN loan_decision  accept IF income high AND age youth THEN loan_decision  accept IF income high AND age  middle_age THEN loan_decision  accept IF income  high AND credit_rating  excellent THEN loan_decision  accept IF income  high AND credit_rating  fair THEN loan_decision  accept IF income medium THEN loan_decision  accept ··· ··· ··· Figure 8.11 A general-to-speciﬁc search through rule space. 8.4 Rule-Based Classiﬁcation 361 adopts a greedy depth-ﬁrst strategy. Each time it is faced with adding a new attribute test (conjunct) to the current rule, it picks the one that most improves the rule qual- ity, based on the training samples. We will say more about rule quality measures in a minute. For the moment, let’s say we use rule accuracy as our quality measure. Getting back to our example with Figure 8.11, suppose Learn One Rule ﬁnds that the attribute test income = high best improves the accuracy of our current (empty) rule. We append it to the condition, so that the current rule becomes IF income = high THEN loan decision = accept. Each time we add an attribute test to a rule, the resulting rule should cover relatively more of the “accept” tuples. During the next iteration, we again consider the possible attribute tests and end up selecting credit rating = excellent. Our current rule grows to become IF income = high AND credit rating = excellent THEN loan decision = accept. The process repeats, where at each step we continue to greedily grow rules until the resulting rule meets an acceptable quality level. Greedy search does not allow for backtracking. At each step, we heuristically add what appears to be the best choice at the moment. What if we unknowingly made a poor choice along the way? To lessen the chance of this happening, instead of selecting the best attribute test to append to the current rule, we can select the best k attribute tests. In this way, we perform a beam search of width k, wherein we maintain the k best candidates overall at each step, rather than a single best candidate. Rule Quality Measures Learn One Rule needs a measure of rule quality. Every time it considers an attribute test, it must check to see if appending such a test to the current rule’s condition will result in an improved rule. Accuracy may seem like an obvious choice at ﬁrst, but consider Example 8.8. Example 8.8 Choosing between two rules based on accuracy. Consider the two rules as illustrated in Figure 8.12. Both are for the class loan decision = accept. We use “a” to represent the tuples of class “accept” and “r” for the tuples of class “reject.” Rule R1 correctly classiﬁes 38 of the 40 tuples it covers. Rule R2 covers only two tuples, which it correctly classiﬁes. Their respective accuracies are 95% and 100%. Thus, R2 has greater accuracy than R1, but it is not the better rule because of its small coverage. From this example, we see that accuracy on its own is not a reliable estimate of rule quality. Coverage on its own is not useful either—for a given class we could have a rule that covers many tuples, most of which belong to other classes! Thus, we seek other mea- sures for evaluating rule quality, which may integrate aspects of accuracy and coverage. Here we will look at a few, namely entropy, another based on information gain, and a statistical test that considers coverage. For our discussion, suppose we are learning rules 362 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts R1 R2 r r r r r r r r r r a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a Figure 8.12 Rules for the class loan decision = accept, showing accept (a) and reject (r) tuples. for the class c. Our current rule is R: IF condition THEN class = c. We want to see if logically ANDing a given attribute test to condition would result in a better rule. We call the new condition, condition′, where R′: IF condition′ THEN class = c is our potential new rule. In other words, we want to see if R′ is any better than R. We have already seen entropy in our discussion of the information gain measure used for attribute selection in decision tree induction (Section 8.2.2, Eq. 8.1). It is also known as the expected information needed to classify a tuple in data set, D. Here, D is the set of tuples covered by condition′ and pi is the probability of class Ci in D. The lower the entropy, the better condition′ is. Entropy prefers conditions that cover a large number of tuples of a single class and few tuples of other classes. Another measure is based on information gain and was proposed in FOIL (First Order Inductive Learner), a sequential covering algorithm that learns ﬁrst-order logic rules. Learning ﬁrst-order rules is more complex because such rules contain variables, whereas the rules we are concerned with in this section are propositional (i.e., variable- free).5 In machine learning, the tuples of the class for which we are learning rules are called positive tuples, while the remaining tuples are negative. Let pos (neg) be the num- ber of positive (negative) tuples covered by R. Let pos′ (neg′) be the number of positive (negative) tuples covered by R′. FOIL assesses the information gained by extending condition′ as FOIL Gain = pos′ ×  log2 pos′ pos′ + neg′ −log2 pos pos + neg  . (8.18) It favors rules that have high accuracy and cover many positive tuples. We can also use a statistical test of signiﬁcance to determine if the apparent effect of a rule is not attributed to chance but instead indicates a genuine correlation between 5Incidentally, FOIL was also proposed by Quinlan, the father of ID3. 8.4 Rule-Based Classiﬁcation 363 attribute values and classes. The test compares the observed distribution among classes of tuples covered by a rule with the expected distribution that would result if the rule made predictions at random. We want to assess whether any observed differences between these two distributions may be attributed to chance. We can use the likelihood ratio statistic, Likelihood Ratio = 2 m X i=1 fi log  fi ei  , (8.19) where m is the number of classes. For tuples satisfying the rule, fi is the observed frequency of each class i among the tuples. ei is what we would expect the frequency of each class i to be if the rule made random predictions. The statistic has a χ2 distribution with m −1 degrees of freedom. The higher the likelihood ratio, the more likely that there is a signiﬁcant difference in the number of correct predictions made by our rule in comparison with a “random guessor.” That is, the performance of our rule is not due to chance. The ratio helps identify rules with insigniﬁcant coverage. CN2 uses entropy together with the likelihood ratio test, while FOIL’s information gain is used by RIPPER. Rule Pruning Learn One Rule does not employ a test set when evaluating rules. Assessments of rule quality as described previously are made with tuples from the original training data. These assessments are optimistic because the rules will likely overﬁt the data. That is, the rules may perform well on the training data, but less well on subsequent data. To compensate for this, we can prune the rules. A rule is pruned by removing a conjunct (attribute test). We choose to prune a rule, R, if the pruned version of R has greater quality, as assessed on an independent set of tuples. As in decision tree pruning, we refer to this set as a pruning set. Various pruning strategies can be used such as the pessimistic pruning approach described in the previous section. FOIL uses a simple yet effective method. Given a rule, R, FOIL Prune(R) = pos −neg pos + neg, (8.20) where pos and neg are the number of positive and negative tuples covered by R, respec- tively. This value will increase with the accuracy of R on a pruning set. Therefore, if the FOIL Prune value is higher for the pruned version of R, then we prune R. By convention, RIPPER starts with the most recently added conjunct when con- sidering pruning. Conjuncts are pruned one at a time as long as this results in an improvement. 364 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts 8.5 Model Evaluation and Selection Now that you may have built a classiﬁcation model, there may be many questions going through your mind. For example, suppose you used data from previous sales to build a classiﬁer to predict customer purchasing behavior. You would like an estimate of how accurately the classiﬁer can predict the purchasing behavior of future customers, that is, future customer data on which the classiﬁer has not been trained. You may even have tried different methods to build more than one classiﬁer and now wish to compare their accuracy. But what is accuracy? How can we estimate it? Are some measures of a classiﬁer’s accuracy more appropriate than others? How can we obtain a reliable accuracy estimate? These questions are addressed in this section. Section 8.5.1 describes various evaluation metrics for the predictive accuracy of a classiﬁer. Holdout and random subsampling (Section 8.5.2), cross-validation (Section 8.5.3), and bootstrap methods (Section 8.5.4) are common techniques for assessing accuracy, based on randomly sampled partitions of the given data. What if we have more than one classiﬁer and want to choose the “best” one? This is referred to as model selection (i.e., choosing one classiﬁer over another). The last two sections address this issue. Section 8.5.5 discusses how to use tests of statistical signiﬁcance to assess whether the difference in accuracy between two classiﬁers is due to chance. Section 8.5.6 presents how to compare classiﬁers based on cost–beneﬁt and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves. 8.5.1 Metrics for Evaluating Classiﬁer Performance This section presents measures for assessing how good or how “accurate” your classiﬁer is at predicting the class label of tuples. We will consider the case of where the class tuples are more or less evenly distributed, as well as the case where classes are unbalanced (e.g., where an important class of interest is rare such as in medical tests). The classiﬁer eval- uation measures presented in this section are summarized in Figure 8.13. They include accuracy (also known as recognition rate), sensitivity (or recall), speciﬁcity, precision, F1, and Fβ. Note that although accuracy is a speciﬁc measure, the word “accuracy” is also used as a general term to refer to a classiﬁer’s predictive abilities. Using training data to derive a classiﬁer and then estimate the accuracy of the resulting learned model can result in misleading overoptimistic estimates due to over- specialization of the learning algorithm to the data. (We will say more on this in a moment!) Instead, it is better to measure the classiﬁer’s accuracy on a test set consisting of class-labeled tuples that were not used to train the model. Before we discuss the various measures, we need to become comfortable with some terminology. Recall that we can talk in terms of positive tuples (tuples of the main class of interest) and negative tuples (all other tuples).6 Given two classes, for example, the positive tuples may be buys computer = yes while the negative tuples are 6In the machine learning and pattern recognition literature, these are referred to as positive samples and negative samples, respectively. 8.5 Model Evaluation and Selection 365 Measure Formula accuracy, recognition rate TP +TN P +N error rate, misclassiﬁcation rate FP +FN P +N sensitivity, true positive rate, TP P recall speciﬁcity, true negative rate TN N precision TP TP +FP F, F1, F-score, 2×precision×recall precision+recall harmonic mean of precision and recall Fβ, where β is a non-negative real number (1+β2)×precision×recall β2 ×precision+recall Figure 8.13 Evaluation measures. Note that some measures are known by more than one name. TP,TN,FP,P, N refer to the number of true positive, true negative, false positive, positive, and negative samples, respectively (see text). buys computer = no. Suppose we use our classiﬁer on a test set of labeled tuples. P is the number of positive tuples and N is the number of negative tuples. For each tuple, we compare the classiﬁer’s class label prediction with the tuple’s known class label. There are four additional terms we need to know that are the “building blocks” used in computing many evaluation measures. Understanding them will make it easy to grasp the meaning of the various measures. True positives (TP): These refer to the positive tuples that were correctly labeled by the classiﬁer. Let TP be the number of true positives. True negatives (TN): These are the negative tuples that were correctly labeled by the classiﬁer. Let TN be the number of true negatives. False positives (FP): These are the negative tuples that were incorrectly labeled as positive (e.g., tuples of class buys computer = no for which the classiﬁer predicted buys computer = yes). Let FP be the number of false positives. False negatives (FN): These are the positive tuples that were mislabeled as neg- ative (e.g., tuples of class buys computer = yes for which the classiﬁer predicted buys computer = no). Let FN be the number of false negatives. These terms are summarized in the confusion matrix of Figure 8.14. The confusion matrix is a useful tool for analyzing how well your classiﬁer can recognize tuples of different classes. TP and TN tell us when the classiﬁer is getting things right, while FP and FN tell us when the classiﬁer is getting things wrong (i.e., 366 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts Predicted class yes no Total Actual class yes TP FN P no FP TN N Total P′ N′ P + N Figure 8.14 Confusion matrix, shown with totals for positive and negative tuples. Classes buys computer = yes buys computer = no Total Recognition (%) buys computer = yes 6954 46 7000 99.34 buys computer = no 412 2588 3000 86.27 Total 7366 2634 10,000 95.42 Figure 8.15 Confusion matrix for the classes buys computer = yes and buys computer = no, where an entry in row i and column j shows the number of tuples of class i that were labeled by the classiﬁer as class j. Ideally, the nondiagonal entries should be zero or close to zero. mislabeling). Given m classes (where m ≥2), a confusion matrix is a table of at least size m by m. An entry, CMi,j in the ﬁrst m rows and m columns indicates the number of tuples of class i that were labeled by the classiﬁer as class j. For a classiﬁer to have good accuracy, ideally most of the tuples would be represented along the diagonal of the confusion matrix, from entry CM1,1 to entry CMm,m, with the rest of the entries being zero or close to zero. That is, ideally, FP and FN are around zero. The table may have additional rows or columns to provide totals. For example, in the confusion matrix of Figure 8.14, P and N are shown. In addition, P′ is the number of tuples that were labeled as positive (TP + FP) and N′ is the number of tuples that were labeled as negative (TN + FN). The total number of tuples is TP + TN + FP + TN, or P + N, or P′ + N′. Note that although the confusion matrix shown is for a binary classiﬁcation problem, confusion matrices can be easily drawn for multiple classes in a similar manner. Now let’s look at the evaluation measures, starting with accuracy. The accuracy of a classiﬁer on a given test set is the percentage of test set tuples that are correctly classiﬁed by the classiﬁer. That is, accuracy = TP + TN P + N . (8.21) In the pattern recognition literature, this is also referred to as the overall recognition rate of the classiﬁer, that is, it reﬂects how well the classiﬁer recognizes tuples of the var- ious classes. An example of a confusion matrix for the two classes buys computer = yes (positive) and buys computer = no (negative) is given in Figure 8.15. Totals are shown, 8.5 Model Evaluation and Selection 367 as well as the recognition rates per class and overall. By glancing at a confusion matrix, it is easy to see if the corresponding classiﬁer is confusing two classes. For example, we see that it mislabeled 412 “no” tuples as “yes.” Accuracy is most effective when the class distribution is relatively balanced. We can also speak of the error rate or misclassiﬁcation rate of a classiﬁer, M, which is simply 1 −accuracy(M), where accuracy(M) is the accuracy of M. This also can be computed as error rate = FP + FN P + N . (8.22) If we were to use the training set (instead of a test set) to estimate the error rate of a model, this quantity is known as the resubstitution error. This error estimate is optimistic of the true error rate (and similarly, the corresponding accuracy estimate is optimistic) because the model is not tested on any samples that it has not already seen. We now consider the class imbalance problem, where the main class of interest is rare. That is, the data set distribution reﬂects a signiﬁcant majority of the negative class and a minority positive class. For example, in fraud detection applications, the class of interest (or positive class) is “fraud,” which occurs much less frequently than the negative “nonfraudulant” class. In medical data, there may be a rare class, such as “cancer.” Sup- pose that you have trained a classiﬁer to classify medical data tuples, where the class label attribute is “cancer” and the possible class values are “yes” and “no.” An accu- racy rate of, say, 97% may make the classiﬁer seem quite accurate, but what if only, say, 3% of the training tuples are actually cancer? Clearly, an accuracy rate of 97% may not be acceptable—the classiﬁer could be correctly labeling only the noncancer tuples, for instance, and misclassifying all the cancer tuples. Instead, we need other measures, which access how well the classiﬁer can recognize the positive tuples (cancer = yes) and how well it can recognize the negative tuples (cancer = no). The sensitivity and speciﬁcity measures can be used, respectively, for this purpose. Sensitivity is also referred to as the true positive (recognition) rate (i.e., the proportion of positive tuples that are correctly identiﬁed), while speciﬁcity is the true negative rate (i.e., the proportion of negative tuples that are correctly identiﬁed). These measures are deﬁned as sensitivity = TP P (8.23) speciﬁcity = TN N . (8.24) It can be shown that accuracy is a function of sensitivity and speciﬁcity: accuracy = sensitivity P (P + N) + speciﬁcity N (P + N). (8.25) Example 8.9 Sensitivity and speciﬁcity. Figure 8.16 shows a confusion matrix for medical data where the class values are yes and no for a class label attribute, cancer. The sensitivity 368 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts Classes yes no Total Recognition (%) yes 90 210 300 30.00 no 140 9560 9700 98.56 Total 230 9770 10,000 96.40 Figure 8.16 Confusion matrix for the classes cancer = yes and cancer = no. of the classiﬁer is 90 300 = 30.00%. The speciﬁcity is 9560 9700 = 98.56%. The classiﬁer’s over- all accuracy is 9650 10,000 = 96.50%. Thus, we note that although the classiﬁer has a high accuracy, it’s ability to correctly label the positive (rare) class is poor given its low sen- sitivity. It has high speciﬁcity, meaning that it can accurately recognize negative tuples. Techniques for handling class-imbalanced data are given in Section 8.6.5. The precision and recall measures are also widely used in classiﬁcation. Precision can be thought of as a measure of exactness (i.e., what percentage of tuples labeled as positive are actually such), whereas recall is a measure of completeness (what percentage of positive tuples are labeled as such). If recall seems familiar, that’s because it is the same as sensitivity (or the true positive rate). These measures can be computed as precision = TP TP + FP (8.26) recall = TP TP + FN = TP P . (8.27) Example 8.10 Precision and recall. The precision of the classiﬁer in Figure 8.16 for the yes class is 90 230 = 39.13%. The recall is 90 300 = 30.00%, which is the same calculation for sensitivity in Example 8.9. A perfect precision score of 1.0 for a class C means that every tuple that the classiﬁer labeled as belonging to class C does indeed belong to class C. However, it does not tell us anything about the number of class C tuples that the classiﬁer mislabeled. A perfect recall score of 1.0 for C means that every item from class C was labeled as such, but it does not tell us how many other tuples were incorrectly labeled as belonging to class C. There tends to be an inverse relationship between precision and recall, where it is possi- ble to increase one at the cost of reducing the other. For example, our medical classiﬁer may achieve high precision by labeling all cancer tuples that present a certain way as cancer, but may have low recall if it mislabels many other instances of cancer tuples. Pre- cision and recall scores are typically used together, where precision values are compared for a ﬁxed value of recall, or vice versa. For example, we may compare precision values at a recall value of, say, 0.75. An alternative way to use precision and recall is to combine them into a single mea- sure. This is the approach of the F measure (also known as the F1 score or F-score) and 8.5 Model Evaluation and Selection 369 the Fβ measure. They are deﬁned as F = 2 × precision × recall precision + recall (8.28) Fβ = (1 + β2) × precision × recall β2 × precision + recall , (8.29) where β is a non-negative real number. The F measure is the harmonic mean of precision and recall (the proof of which is left as an exercise). It gives equal weight to precision and recall. The Fβ measure is a weighted measure of precision and recall. It assigns β times as much weight to recall as to precision. Commonly used Fβ measures are F2 (which weights recall twice as much as precision) and F0.5 (which weights precision twice as much as recall). “Are there other cases where