precomputed 2-D fragments for Ak and Aq, respectively, using no instantiations (i.e., all possible values). The obtained TID lists are intersected to derive the ﬁnal TID lists, which are used to fetch the corresponding measures from the ID measure array to derive the “base cuboid” of a 2-D subcube for two dimensions (Ak, Aq). A fast cube computation algorithm can be applied to compute this 2-D cube based on the derived base cuboid. The computed 2-D cube is then ready for OLAP operations. Example 5.13 Subcube query. Suppose that a user wants to compute the subcube query, ⟨a2, b1, ?, ∗ , ? : count()?⟩, for our database shown earlier in Table 5.4, and that the shell fragments have been precomputed as described in Example 5.10. The query can be broken into three best-ﬁt fragments according to the instantiated and inquired dimensions: AB, C, 218 Chapter 5 Data Cube Technology and E, where AB has the instantiation (a2, b1). The fetch of the TID lists for these parti- tions returns (a2, b1) : {4, 5}, (c1) : {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} and {(e1 : {1, 2}), (e2 : {3, 4}), (e3 : {5})}, respectively. The intersection of these corresponding TID lists contains a cuboid with two tuples: {(c1, e2) : {4},5 (c1, e3) : {5}}. This base cuboid can be used to compute the 2-D data cube, which is trivial. For large data sets, a fragment size of 2 or 3 typically results in reasonable storage requirements for the shell fragments and for fast query response time. Querying with shell fragments is substantially faster than answering queries using precomputed data cubes that are stored on disk. In comparison to full cube computation, Frag-Shells is recommended if there are less than four inquired dimensions. Otherwise, more efﬁcient algorithms, such as Star-Cubing, can be used for fast online cube computation. Frag- Shells can be easily extended to allow incremental updates, the details of which are left as an exercise. 5.3 Processing Advanced Kinds of Queries by Exploring Cube Technology Data cubes are not conﬁned to the simple multidimensional structure illustrated in the last section for typical business data warehouse applications. The methods described in this section further develop data cube technology for effective processing of advanced kinds of queries. Section 5.3.1 explores sampling cubes. This extension of data cube technology can be used to answer queries on sample data, such as survey data, which rep- resent a sample or subset of a target data population of interest. Section 5.3.2 explains how ranking cubes can be computed to answer top-k queries, such as “ﬁnd the top 5 cars,” according to some user-speciﬁed criteria. The basic data cube structure has been further extended for various sophisticated data types and new applications. Here we list some examples, such as spatial data cubes for the design and implementation of geospatial data warehouses, and multimedia data cubes for the multidimensional analysis of multimedia data (those containing images and videos). RFID data cubes handle the compression and multidimensional analy- sis of RFID (i.e., radio-frequency identiﬁcation) data. Text cubes and topic cubes were developed for the application of vector-space models and generative language models, respectively, in the analysis of multidimensional text databases (which contain both structure attributes and narrative text attributes). 5.3.1 Sampling Cubes: OLAP-Based Mining on Sampling Data When collecting data, we often collect only a subset of the data we would ideally like to gather. In statistics, this is known as collecting a sample of the data population. 5That is, the intersection of the TID lists for (a2, b1), (c1), and (e2) is {4}. 5.3 Processing Advanced Kinds of Queries by Exploring Cube Technology 219 The resulting data are called sample data. Data are often sampled to save on costs, manpower, time, and materials. In many applications, the collection of the entire data population of interest is unrealistic. In the study of TV ratings or pre-election polls, for example, it is impossible to gather the opinion of everyone in the population. Most pub- lished ratings or polls rely on a data sample for analysis. The results are extrapolated for the entire population, and associated with certain statistical measures such as a conﬁ- dence interval. The conﬁdence interval tells us how reliable a result is. Statistical surveys based on sampling are a common tool in many ﬁelds like politics, healthcare, market research, and social and natural sciences. “How effective is OLAP on sample data?” OLAP traditionally has the full data pop- ulation on hand, yet with sample data, we have only a small subset. If we try to apply traditional OLAP tools to sample data, we encounter three challenges. First, sample data are often sparse in the multidimensional sense. When a user drills down on the data, it is easy to reach a point with very few or no samples even when the overall sample size is large. Traditional OLAP simply uses whatever data are available to compute a query answer. To extrapolate such an answer for a population based on a small sample could be misleading: A single outlier or a slight bias in the sampling can distort the answer sig- niﬁcantly. Second, with sample data, statistical methods are used to provide a measure of reliability (e.g., a conﬁdence interval) to indicate the quality of the query answer as it pertains to the population. Traditional OLAP is not equipped with such tools. A sampling cube framework was introduced to tackle each of the preceding challenges. Sampling Cube Framework The sampling cube is a data cube structure that stores the sample data and their multi- dimensional aggregates. It supports OLAP on sample data. It calculates conﬁdence inter- vals as a quality measure for any multidimensional query. Given a sample data relation (i.e., base cuboid) R, the sampling cube CR typically computes the sample mean, sample standard deviation, and other task-speciﬁc measures. In statistics, a conﬁdence interval is used to indicate the reliability of an estimate. Suppose we want to estimate the mean age of all viewers of a given TV show. We have sample data (a subset) of this data population. Let’s say our sample mean is 35 years. This becomes our estimate for the entire population of viewers as well, but how conﬁdent can we be that 35 is also the mean of the true population? It is unlikely that the sample mean will be exactly equal to the true population mean because of sampling error. Therefore, we need to qualify our estimate in some way to indicate the general magnitude of this error. This is typically done by computing a conﬁdence interval, which is an estimated value range with a given high probability of covering the true population value. A con- ﬁdence interval for our example could be “the actual mean will not vary by +/−two standard deviations 95% of the time.” (Recall that the standard deviation is just a num- ber, which can be computed as shown in Section 2.2.2.) A conﬁdence interval is always qualiﬁed by a particular conﬁdence level. In our example, it is 95%. The conﬁdence interval is calculated as follows. Let x be a set of samples. The mean of the samples is denoted by ¯x, and the number of samples in x is denoted by l. Assuming 220 Chapter 5 Data Cube Technology that the standard deviation of the population is unknown, the sample standard deviation of x is denoted by s. Given a desired conﬁdence level, the conﬁdence interval for ¯x is ¯x ± tc ˆσ¯x, (5.1) where tc is the critical t-value associated with the conﬁdence level and ˆσ¯x = s√ l is the estimated standard error of the mean. To ﬁnd the appropriate tc, specify the desired conﬁdence level (e.g., 95%) and also the degree of freedom, which is just l −1. The important thing to note is that the computation involved in computing a conﬁ- dence interval is algebraic. Let’s look at the three terms involved in Eq. (5.1). The ﬁrst is the mean of the sample set, ¯x, which is algebraic; the second is the critical t-value, which is calculated by a lookup, and with respect to x, it depends on l, a distributive measure; and the third is ˆσ¯x = s√ l , which also turns out to be algebraic if one records the linear sum (Pl i=1 xi) and squared sum (Pl i=1 x2 i ). Because the terms involved are either alge- braic or distributive, the conﬁdence interval computation is algebraic. Actually, since both the mean and conﬁdence interval are algebraic, at every cell, exactly three values are sufﬁcient to calculate them—all of which are either distributive or algebraic: 1. l 2. sum = Pl i=1 xi 3. squared sum = Pl i=1 x2 i There are many efﬁcient techniques for computing algebraic and distributive mea- sures (Section 4.2.4). Therefore, any of the previously developed cubing algorithms can be used to efﬁciently construct a sampling cube. Now that we have established that sampling cubes can be computed efﬁciently, our next step is to ﬁnd a way of boosting the conﬁdence of results obtained for queries on sample data. Query Processing: Boosting Conﬁdences for Small Samples A query posed against a data cube can be either a point query or a range query. With- out loss of generality, consider the case of a point query. Here, it corresponds to a cell in sampling cube CR. The goal is to provide an accurate point estimate for the samples in that cell. Because the cube also reports the conﬁdence interval associated with the sample mean, there is some measure of “reliability” to the returned answer. If the con- ﬁdence interval is small, the reliability is deemed good; however, if the interval is large, the reliability is questionable. “What can we do to boost the reliability of query answers?” Consider what affects the conﬁdence interval size. There are two main factors: the variance of the sample data and the sample size. First, a rather large variance in the cell may indicate that the chosen cube 5.3 Processing Advanced Kinds of Queries by Exploring Cube Technology 221 cell is poor for prediction. A better solution is probably to drill down on the query cell to a more speciﬁc one (i.e., asking more speciﬁc queries). Second, a small sample size can cause a large conﬁdence interval. When there are very few samples, the correspond- ing tc is large because of the small degree of freedom. This in turn could cause a large conﬁdence interval. Intuitively, this makes sense. Suppose one is trying to ﬁgure out the average income of people in the United States. Just asking two or three people does not give much conﬁdence to the returned response. The best way to solve this small sample size problem is to get more data. Fortunately, there is usually an abundance of additional data available in the cube. The data do not match the query cell exactly; however, we can consider data from cells that are “close by.” There are two ways to incorporate such data to enhance the reliability of the query answer: (1) intracuboid query expansion, where we consider nearby cells within the same cuboid, and (2) intercuboid query expansion, where we consider more general versions (from parent cuboids) of the query cell. Let’s see how this works, starting with intra- cuboid query expansion. Method 1. Intracuboid query expansion. Here, we expand the sample size by including nearby cells in the same cuboid as the queried cell, as shown in Figure 5.15(a). We just have to be careful that the new samples serve to increase the conﬁdence in the answer without changing the query’s semantics. So, the ﬁrst question is “Which dimensions should be expanded?” The best candidates should be the dimensions that are uncorrelated or weakly correlated with the measure age-occupation cuboid (a) age cuboid age-occupation cuboid (b) occupation cuboid Figure 5.15 Query expansion within sampling cube: Given small data samples, both methods use strate- gies to boost the reliability of query answers by considering additional data cell values. (a) Intracuboid expansion considers nearby cells in the same cuboid as the queried cell. (b) Intercuboid expansion considers more general cells from parent cuboids. 222 Chapter 5 Data Cube Technology value (i.e., the value to be predicted). Expanding within these dimensions will likely increase the sample size and not shift the query’s answer. Consider an example of a 2-D query specifying education = “college” and birth month = “July.” Let the cube measure be average income. Intuitively, education has a high correlation to income while birth month does not. It would be harmful to expand the education dimension to include val- ues such as “graduate” or “high school.” They are likely to alter the ﬁnal result. However, expansion in the birth month dimension to include other month values could be helpful, because it is unlikely to change the result but will increase sampling size. To mathematically measure the correlation of a dimension to the cube value, the correlation between the dimension’s values and their aggregated cube measures is com- puted. Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient for numeric data and the χ2 correlation test for nominal data are popularly used correlation measures, although many other measures, such as covariance, can be used. (These measures were presented in Section 3.3.2.) A dimension that is strongly correlated with the value to be predicted should not be a candidate for expansion. Notice that since the correlation of a dimension with the cube measure is independent of a particular query, it should be precomputed and stored with the cube measure to facilitate efﬁcient online analysis. After selecting dimensions for expansion, the next question is “Which values within these dimensions should the expansion use?” This relies on the semantic knowledge of the dimensions in question. The goal should be to select semantically similar values to minimize the risk of altering the ﬁnal result. Consider the age dimension—similarity of values in this dimension is clear. There is a deﬁnite (numeric) order to the val- ues. Dimensions with numeric or ordinal (ranked) data (like education) have a deﬁnite ordering among data values. Therefore, we can select values that are close to the instan- tiated query value. For nominal data of a dimension that is organized in a multilevel hierarchy in a data cube (e.g., location), we should select those values located in the same branch of the tree (e.g., the same district or city). By considering additional data during query expansion, we are aiming for a more accurate and reliable answer. As mentioned before, strongly correlated dimensions are precluded from expansion for this purpose. An additional strategy is to ensure that new samples share the “same” cube measure value (e.g., mean income) as the exist- ing samples in the query cell. The two-sample t-test is a relatively simple statistical method that can be used to determine whether two samples have the same mean (or any other point estimate), where “same” means that they do not differ signiﬁcantly. (It is described in greater detail in Section 8.5.5 on model selection using statistical tests of signiﬁcance.) The test determines whether two samples have the same mean (the null hypothesis) with the only assumption being that they are both normally distributed. The test fails if there is evidence that the two samples do not share the same mean. Furthermore, the test can be performed with a conﬁdence level as an input. This allows the user to control how strict or loose the query expansion will be. Example 5.14 shows how the intracuboid expansion strategies just described can be used to answer a query on sample data. 5.3 Processing Advanced Kinds of Queries by Exploring Cube Technology 223 Table 5.10 Sample Customer Survey Data gender age education occupation income female 23 college teacher $85,000 female 40 college programmer $50,000 female 31 college programmer $52,000 female 50 graduate teacher $90,000 female 62 graduate CEO $500,000 male 25 high school programmer $50,000 male 28 high school CEO $250,000 male 40 college teacher $80,000 male 50 college programmer $45,000 male 57 graduate programmer $80,000 Example 5.14 Intracuboid query expansion to answer a query on sample data. Consider a book retailer trying to learn more about its customers’ annual income levels. In Table 5.10, a sample of the survey data collected is shown.6 In the survey, customers are segmented by four attributes, namely gender, age, education, and occupation. Let a query on customer income be “age = 25,” where the user speciﬁes a 95% conﬁdence level. Suppose this returns an income value of $50,000 with a rather large conﬁdence interval.7 Suppose also, that this conﬁdence interval is larger than a preset threshold and that the age dimension was found to have little correlation with income in this data set. Therefore, intracuboid expansion starts within the age dimension. The nearest cell is “age = 23,” which returns an income of $85,000. The two-sample t-test at the 95% conﬁdence level passes so the query expands; it is now “age = {23,25}” with a smaller conﬁdence interval than initially. However, it is still larger than the threshold, so expansion continues to the next nearest cell: “age = 28,” which returns an income of $250,000. The two sample t-test between this cell and the original query cell fails; as a result, it is ignored. Next, “age = 31” is checked and it passes the test. The conﬁdence interval of the three cells combined is now below the threshold and the expansion ﬁnishes at “age = {23,25,31}.” The mean of the income values at these three cells is 85,000+50,000+52,000 3 = $62,333, which is returned as the query answer. It has a smaller conﬁdence interval, and thus is more reliable than the response of $50,000, which would have been returned if intracuboid expansion had not been considered. Method 2. Intercuboid query expansion. In this case, the expansion occurs by looking to a more general cell, as shown in Figure 5.15(b). For example, the cell in the 2-D cuboid 6For the sake of illustration, ignore the fact that the sample size is too small to be statistically signiﬁcant. 7For the sake of the example, suppose this is true even though there is only one sample. In practice, more points are needed to calculate a legitimate value. 224 Chapter 5 Data Cube Technology age-occupation can use its parent in either of the 1-D cuboids, age or occupation. Think of intercuboid expansion as just an extreme case of intracuboid expansion, where all the cells within a dimension are used in the expansion. This essentially sets the dimension to ∗and thus generalizes to a higher-level cuboid. A k-dimensional cell has k direct parents in the cuboid lattice, where each parent is (k −1)-dimensional. There are many more ancestor cells in the data cube (e.g., if mul- tiple dimensions are rolled up simultaneously). However, we choose only one parent here to make the search space tractable and to limit the change in the query’s semantics. As with intracuboid query expansion, correlated dimensions are not allowed in inter- cuboid expansions. Within the uncorrelated dimensions, the two-sample t-test can be performed to conﬁrm that the parent and the query cell share the same sample mean. If multiple parent cells pass the test, the test’s conﬁdence level can be adjusted progressively higher until only one passes. Alternatively, multiple parent cells can be used to boost the conﬁdence simultaneously. The choice is application dependent. Example 5.15 Intercuboid expansion to answer a query on sample data. Given the input relation in Table 5.10, let the query on income be “occupation = teacher ∧gender = male.” There is only one sample in Table 5.10 that matches the query, and it has an income of $80,000. Suppose the corresponding conﬁdence interval is larger than a preset threshold. We use intercuboid expansion to ﬁnd a more reliable answer. There are two parent cells in the data cube: “gender = male” and “occupation = teacher.” By moving up to “gender = male” (and thus setting occupation to ∗), the mean income is $101,000. A two sample t-test reveals that this parent’s sample mean differs signiﬁcantly from that of the original query cell, so it is ignored. Next, “occupation = teacher” is considered. It has a mean income of $85,000 and passes the two-sample t-test. As a result, the query is expanded to “occupation = teacher” and an income value of $85,000 is returned with acceptable reliability. “How can we determine which method to choose—intracuboid expansion or intercuboid expansion?” This is difﬁcult to answer without knowing the data and the application. A strategy for choosing between the two is to consider what the tolerance is for change in the query’s semantics. This depends on the speciﬁc dimensions chosen in the query. For instance, the user might tolerate a bigger change in semantics for the age dimension than education. The difference in tolerance could be so large that the user is willing to set age to ∗(i.e., intercuboid expansion) rather than letting education change at all. Domain knowledge is helpful here. So far, our discussion has only focused on full materialization of the sampling cube. In many real-world problems, this is often impossible, especially for high-dimensional cases. Real-world survey data, for example, can easily contain over 50 variables (i.e., dimensions). The sampling cube size would grow exponentially with the number of dimensions. To handle high-dimensional data, a sampling cube method called Sampling Cube Shell was developed. It integrates the Frag-Shell method of Section 5.2.4 with the query expansion approach. The shell computes only a subset of the full sampling cube. 5.3 Processing Advanced Kinds of Queries by Exploring Cube Technology 225 The subset should consist of relatively low-dimensional cuboids (that are commonly queried) and cuboids that offer the most beneﬁt to the user. The details are left to inter- ested readers as an exercise. The method was tested on both real and synthetic data and found to be efﬁcient and effective in answering queries. 5.3.2 Ranking Cubes: Efﬁcient Computation of Top-k Queries The data cube helps not only online analytical processing of multidimensional queries but also search and data mining. In this section, we introduce a new cube structure called Ranking Cube and examine how it contributes to the efﬁcient processing of top-k queries. Instead of returning a large set of indiscriminative answers to a query, a top-k query (or ranking query) returns only the best k results according to a user-speciﬁed preference. The results are returned in ranked order so that the best is at the top. The user- speciﬁed preference generally consists of two components: a selection condition and a ranking function. Top-k queries are common in many applications like searching web databases, k-nearest-neighbor searches with approximate matches, and similarity queries in multimedia databases. Example 5.16 A top-k query. Consider an online used-car database, R, that maintains the following information for each car: producer (e.g., Ford, Honda), model (e.g., Taurus, Accord), type (e.g., sedan, convertible), color (e.g., red, silver), transmission (e.g., auto, manual), price, mileage, and so on. A typical top-k query over this database is Q1: select top 5 * from R where producer = “Ford” and type = “sedan” order by (price −10K)2 + (mileage −30K)2 asc Within the dimensions (or attributes) for R, producer and type are used here as selection dimensions. The ranking function is given in the order-by clause. It speciﬁes the rank- ing dimensions, price and mileage. Q1 searches for the top-5 sedans made by Ford. The entries found are ranked or sorted in ascending (asc) order, according to the ranking function. The ranking function is formulated so that entries that have price and mileage closest to the user’s speciﬁed values of $10K and 30K, respectively, appear toward the top of the list. The database may have many dimensions that could be used for selection, describ- ing, for example, whether a car has power windows, air conditioning, or a sunroof. Users may pick any subset of dimensions and issue a top-k query using their preferred rank- ing function. There are many other similar application scenarios. For example, when searching for hotels, ranking functions are often constructed based on price and distance to an area of interest. Selection conditions can be imposed on, say, the hotel location 226 Chapter 5 Data Cube Technology district, the star rating, and whether the hotel offers complimentary treats or Internet access. The ranking functions may be linear, quadratic, or any other form. As shown in the preceding examples, individual users may not only propose ad hoc ranking functions, but also have different data subsets of interest. Users often want to thoroughly study the data via multidimensional analysis of the top-k query results. For example, if unsatisﬁed by the top-5 results returned by Q1, the user may roll up on the producer dimension to check the top-5 results on all sedans. The dynamic nature of the problem imposes a great challenge to researchers. OLAP requires ofﬂine pre- computation so that multidimensional analysis can be performed on-the-ﬂy, yet the ad hoc ranking functions prohibit full materialization. A natural compromise is to adopt a semi-ofﬂine materialization and semi-online computation model. Suppose a relation R has selection dimensions (A1,A2, ...,AS) and ranking dimen- sions (N1,N2,...,NR). Values in each ranking dimension can be partitioned into multi- ple intervals according to the data and expected query distributions. Regarding the price of used cars, for example, we may have, say, these four partitions (or value ranges): ≤5K, [5 −10K), [10 −15K), and ≥15K. A ranking cube can be constructed by performing multidimensional aggregations on selection dimensions. We can store the count for each partition of each ranking dimension, thereby making the cube “rank-aware.” The top-k queries can be answered by ﬁrst accessing the cells in the more preferred value ranges before consulting the cells in the less preferred value ranges. Example 5.17 Using a ranking cube to answer a top-k query. Suppose Table 5.11 shows CMT, a mate- rialized (i.e., precomputed) cuboid of a ranking cube for used-car sales. The cuboid, CMT, is for the selection dimensions producer and type. It shows the count and corre- sponding tuple IDs (TIDs) for various partitions of the ranking dimensions, price and mileage. Query Q1 can be answered by using a selection condition to select the appropriate selection dimension values (i.e., producer = “Ford” and type = “sedan”) in cuboid CMT. In addition, the ranking function “(price −10K)2 + (mileage −30K)2” is used to ﬁnd the tuples that most closely match the user’s criteria. If there are not enough matching tuples found in the closest matching cells, the next closest matching cells will need to be accessed. We may even drill down to the corresponding lower-level cells to see the count distributions of cells that match the ranking function and additional criteria regarding, say, model, maintenance situation, or other loaded features. Only users who really want to see more detailed information, such as interior photos, will need to access the physical records stored in the database. Table 5.11 Cuboid of a Ranking Cube for Used-Car Sales producer type price mileage count TIDs Ford sedan <5K 30–40K 7 t6, ..., t68 Ford sedan 5–10K 30–40K 50 t15, ..., t152 Honda sedan 10–15K 30–40K 20 t8, ..., t32 ... ... ... ... ... ... 5.4 Multidimensional Data Analysis in Cube Space 227 Most real-life top-k queries are likely to involve only a small subset of selection attributes. To support high-dimensional ranking cubes, we can carefully select the cuboids that need to be materialized. For example, we could choose to materialize only the 1-D cuboids that contain single-selection dimensions. This will achieve low space overhead and still have high performance when the number of selection dimensions is large. In some cases, there may exist many ranking dimensions to support multiple users with rather different preferences. For example, buyers may search for houses by considering various factors like price, distance to school or shopping, number of years old, ﬂoor space, and tax. In this case, a possible solution is to create multiple data parti- tions, each of which consists of a subset of the ranking dimensions. The query processing may need to search over a joint space involving multiple data partitions. In summary, the general philosophy of ranking cubes is to materialize such cubes on the set of selection dimensions. Use of the interval-based partitioning in ranking dimensions makes the ranking cube efﬁcient and ﬂexible at supporting ad hoc user queries. Various implementation techniques and query optimization methods have been developed for efﬁcient computation and query processing based on this framework. 5.4 Multidimensional Data Analysis in Cube Space Data cubes create a ﬂexible and powerful means to group and aggregate data subsets. They allow data to be explored in multiple dimensional combinations and at vary- ing aggregate granularities. This capability greatly increases the analysis bandwidth and helps effective discovery of interesting patterns and knowledge from data. The use of cube space makes the data space both meaningful and tractable. This section presents methods of multidimensional data analysis that make use of data cubes to organize data into intuitive regions of interest at varying granularities. Section 5.4.1 presents prediction cubes, a technique for multidimensional data mining that facilitates predictive modeling in multidimensional space. Section 5.4.2 describes how to construct multifeature cubes. These support complex analytical queries involving multiple dependent aggregates at multiple granularities. Finally, Section 5.4.3 describes an interactive method for users to systematically explore cube space. In such exception- based, discovery-driven exploration, interesting exceptions or anomalies in the data are automatically detected and marked for users with visual cues. 5.4.1 Prediction Cubes: Prediction Mining in Cube Space Recently, researchers have turned their attention toward multidimensional data min- ing to uncover knowledge at varying dimensional combinations and granularities. Such mining is also known as exploratory multidimensional data mining and online analytical data mining (OLAM). Multidimensional data space is huge. In preparing the data, how can we identify the interesting subspaces for exploration? To what granularities should we aggregate the data? Multidimensional data mining in cube space organizes data of 228 Chapter 5 Data Cube Technology interest into intuitive regions at various granularities. It analyzes and mines the data by applying various data mining techniques systematically over these regions. There are at least four ways in which OLAP-style analysis can be fused with data mining techniques: 1. Use cube space to deﬁne the data space for mining. Each region in cube space repre- sents a subset of data over which we wish to ﬁnd interesting patterns. Cube space is deﬁned by a set of expert-designed, informative dimension hierarchies, not just arbitrary subsets of data. Therefore, the use of cube space makes the data space both meaningful and tractable. 2. Use OLAP queries to generate features and targets for mining. The features and even the targets (that we wish to learn to predict) can sometimes be naturally deﬁned as OLAP aggregate queries over regions in cube space. 3. Use data mining models as building blocks in a multistep mining process. Multidimen- sional data mining in cube space may consist of multiple steps, where data mining models can be viewed as building blocks that are used to describe the behavior of interesting data sets, rather than the end results. 4. Use data cube computation techniques to speed up repeated model construction. Multi- dimensional data mining in cube space may require building a model for each candidate data space, which is usually too expensive to be feasible. However, by care- fully sharing computation across model construction for different candidates based on data cube computation techniques, efﬁcient mining is achievable. In this subsection we study prediction cubes, an example of multidimensional data mining where the cube space is explored for prediction tasks. A prediction cube is a cube structure that stores prediction models in multidimensional data space and supports prediction in an OLAP manner. Recall that in a data cube, each cell value is an aggregate number (e.g., count) computed over the data subset in that cell. However, each cell value in a prediction cube is computed by evaluating a predictive model built on the data subset in that cell, thereby representing that subset’s predictive behavior. Instead of seeing prediction models as the end result, prediction cubes use prediction models as building blocks to deﬁne the interestingness of data subsets, that is, they iden- tify data subsets that indicate more accurate prediction. This is best explained with an example. Example 5.18 Prediction cube for identiﬁcation of interesting cube subspaces. Suppose a company has a customer table with the attributes time (with two granularity levels: month and year), location (with two granularity levels: state and country), gender, salary, and one class-label attribute: valued customer. A manager wants to analyze the decision process of whether a customer is highly valued with respect to time and location. In particular, he is interested in the question “Are there times at and locations in which the value of a 5.4 Multidimensional Data Analysis in Cube Space 229 customer depended greatly on the customer’s gender?” Notice that he believes time and location play a role in predicting valued customers, but at what granularity levels do they depend on gender for this task? For example, is performing analysis using {month, country} better than {year, state}? Consider a data table D (e.g., the customer table). Let X be the attributes set for which no concept hierarchy has been deﬁned (e.g., gender, salary). Let Y be the class- label attribute (e.g., valued customer), and Z be the set of multilevel attributes, that is, attributes for which concept hierarchies have been deﬁned (e.g., time, location). Let V be the set of attributes for which we would like to deﬁne their predictiveness. In our example, this set is {gender}. The predictiveness of V on a data subset can be quantiﬁed by the difference in accuracy between the model built on that subset using X to predict Y and the model built on that subset using X −V (e.g., {salary}) to predict Y. The intuition is that, if the difference is large, V must play an important role in the prediction of class label Y. Given a set of attributes, V, and a learning algorithm, the prediction cube at granular- ity ⟨l1,...,ld⟩(e.g., ⟨year,state⟩) is a d-dimensional array, in which the value in each cell (e.g., [2010, Illinois]) is the predictiveness of V evaluated on the subset deﬁned by the cell (e.g., the records in the customer table with time in 2010 and location in Illinois). Supporting OLAP roll-up and drill-down operations on a prediction cube is a computational challenge requiring the materialization of cell values at many different granularities. For simplicity, we can consider only full materialization. A naïve way to fully materialize a prediction cube is to exhaustively build models and evaluate them for each cell and granularity. This method is very expensive if the base data set is large. An ensemble method called Probability-Based Ensemble (PBE) was developed as a more feasible alternative. It requires model construction for only the ﬁnest-grained cells. OLAP-style bottom-up aggregation is then used to generate the values of the coarser-grained cells. The prediction of a predictive model can be seen as ﬁnding a class label that maxi- mizes a scoring function. The PBE method was developed to approximately make the scoring function of any predictive model distributively decomposable. In our discus- sion of data cube measures in Section 4.2.4, we showed that distributive and algebraic measures can be computed efﬁciently. Therefore, if the scoring function used is dis- tributively or algebraically decomposable, prediction cubes can also be computed with efﬁciency. In this way, the PBE method reduces prediction cube computation to data cube computation. For example, previous studies have shown that the na¨ıve Bayes classiﬁer has an alge- braically decomposable scoring function, and the kernel density–based classiﬁer has a distributively decomposable scoring function.8 Therefore, either of these could be used 8Na¨ıve Bayes classiﬁers are detailed in Chapter 8. Kernel density–based classiﬁers, such as support vector machines, are described in Chapter 9. 230 Chapter 5 Data Cube Technology to implement prediction cubes efﬁciently. The PBE method presents a novel approach to multidimensional data mining in cube space. 5.4.2 Multifeature Cubes: Complex Aggregation at Multiple Granularities Data cubes facilitate the answering of analytical or mining-oriented queries as they allow the computation of aggregate data at multiple granularity levels. Traditional data cubes are typically constructed on commonly used dimensions (e.g., time, location, and prod- uct) using simple measures (e.g., count( ), average( ), and sum()). In this section, you will learn a newer way to deﬁne data cubes called multifeature cubes. Multifeature cubes enable more in-depth analysis. They can compute more complex queries of which the measures depend on groupings of multiple aggregates at varying granularity levels. The queries posed can be much more elaborate and task-speciﬁc than traditional queries, as we shall illustrate in the next examples. Many complex data mining queries can be answered by multifeature cubes without signiﬁcant increase in computational cost, in comparison to cube computation for simple queries with traditional data cubes. To illustrate the idea of multifeature cubes, let’s ﬁrst look at an example of a query on a simple data cube. Example 5.19 A simple data cube query. Let the query be “Find the total sales in 2010, broken down by item, region, and month, with subtotals for each dimension.” To answer this query, a traditional data cube is constructed that aggregates the total sales at the following eight different granularity levels: {(item, region, month), (item, region), (item, month), (month, region), (item), (month), (region), ()}, where () represents all. This data cube is simple in that it does not involve any dependent aggregates. To illustrate what is meant by “dependent aggregates,” let’s examine a more complex query, which can be computed with a multifeature cube. Example 5.20 A complex query involving dependent aggregates. Suppose the query is “Grouping by all subsets of {item, region, month}, ﬁnd the maximum price in 2010 for each group and the total sales among all maximum price tuples.” The speciﬁcation of such a query using standard SQL can be long, repetitive, and difﬁcult to optimize and maintain. Alternatively, it can be speciﬁed concisely using an extended SQL syntax as follows: select item, region, month, max(price), sum(R.sales) from Purchases where year = 2010 cube by item, region, month: R such that R.price = max(price) The tuples representing purchases in 2010 are ﬁrst selected. The cube by clause com- putes aggregates (or group-by’s) for all possible combinations of the attributes item, 5.4 Multidimensional Data Analysis in Cube Space 231 region, and month. It is an n-dimensional generalization of the group-by clause. The attributes speciﬁed in the cube by clause are the grouping attributes. Tuples with the same value on all grouping attributes form one group. Let the groups be g1,..., gr. For each group of tuples gi, the maximum price maxgi among the tuples forming the group is computed. The variable R is a grouping variable, ranging over all tuples in group gi that have a price equal to maxgi (as speciﬁed in the such that clause). The sum of sales of the tuples in gi that R ranges over is computed and returned with the values of the grouping attributes of gi. The resulting cube is a multifeature cube in that it supports complex data mining queries for which multiple dependent aggregates are computed at a variety of gran- ularities. For example, the sum of sales returned in this query is dependent on the set of maximum price tuples for each group. In general, multifeature cubes give users the ﬂexibility to deﬁne sophisticated, task-speciﬁc cubes on which multidimensional aggregation and OLAP-based mining can be performed. “How can multifeature cubes be computed efﬁciently?” The computation of a multifea- ture cube depends on the types of aggregate functions used in the cube. In Chapter 4, we saw that aggregate functions can be categorized as either distributive, algebraic, or holistic. Multifeature cubes can be organized into the same categories and computed efﬁciently by minor extension of the cube computation methods in Section 5.2. 5.4.3 Exception-Based, Discovery-Driven Cube Space Exploration As studied in previous sections, a data cube may have a large number of cuboids, and each cuboid may contain a large number of (aggregate) cells. With such an overwhelm- ingly large space, it becomes a burden for users to even just browse a cube, let alone think of exploring it thoroughly. Tools need to be developed to assist users in intelligently exploring the huge aggregated space of a data cube. In this section, we describe a discovery-driven approach to exploring cube space. Precomputed measures indicating data exceptions are used to guide the user in the data analysis process, at all aggregation levels. We hereafter refer to these measures as excep- tion indicators. Intuitively, an exception is a data cube cell value that is signiﬁcantly different from the value anticipated, based on a statistical model. The model considers variations and patterns in the measure value across all the dimensions to which a cell belongs. For example, if the analysis of item-sales data reveals an increase in sales in December in comparison to all other months, this may seem like an exception in the time dimension. However, it is not an exception if the item dimension is considered, since there is a similar increase in sales for other items during December. The model considers exceptions hidden at all aggregated group-by’s of a data cube. Visual cues, such as background color, are used to reﬂect each cell’s degree of exception, based on the precomputed exception indicators. Efﬁcient algorithms have been pro- posed for cube construction, as discussed in Section 5.2. The computation of exception indicators can be overlapped with cube construction, so that the overall construction of data cubes for discovery-driven exploration is efﬁcient. 232 Chapter 5 Data Cube Technology Three measures are used as exception indicators to help identify data anomalies. These measures indicate the degree of surprise that the quantity in a cell holds, with respect to its expected value. The measures are computed and associated with every cell, for all aggregation levels. They are as follows: SelfExp: This indicates the degree of surprise of the cell value, relative to other cells at the same aggregation level. InExp: This indicates the degree of surprise somewhere beneath the cell, if we were to drill down from it. PathExp: This indicates the degree of surprise for each drill-down path from the cell. The use of these measures for discovery-driven exploration of data cubes is illustrated in Example 5.21. Example 5.21 Discovery-driven exploration of a data cube. Suppose that you want to analyze the monthly sales at AllElectronics as a percentage difference from the previous month. The dimensions involved are item, time, and region. You begin by studying the data aggregated over all items and sales regions for each month, as shown in Figure 5.16. To view the exception indicators, you click on a button marked highlight exceptions on the screen. This translates the SelfExp and InExp values into visual cues, displayed with each cell. Each cell’s background color is based on its SelfExp value. In addition, a box is drawn around each cell, where the thickness and color of the box are func- tions of its InExp value. Thick boxes indicate high InExp values. In both cases, the darker the color, the greater the degree of exception. For example, the dark, thick boxes for sales during July, August, and September signal the user to explore the lower-level aggregations of these cells by drilling down. Drill-downs can be executed along the aggregated item or region dimensions. “Which path has more exceptions?” you wonder. To ﬁnd this out, you select a cell of interest and trigger a path exception module that colors each dimension based on the PathExp value of the cell. This value reﬂects that path’s degree of surprise. Suppose that the path along item contains more exceptions. A drill-down along item results in the cube slice of Figure 5.17, showing the sales over time for each item. At this point, you are presented with many different sales values to analyze. By clicking on the highlight exceptions button, the visual cues are dis- played, bringing focus to the exceptions. Consider the sales difference of 41% for “Sony Sum of sales Month Total Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 1% −1% 0% 1% 3% −1% −9% −1% 2% −4% 3% Figure 5.16 Change in sales over time. 5.4 Multidimensional Data Analysis in Cube Space 233 Avg. sales Sony color printer HP color printer HP b/w printer Sony b/w printer Item Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Month Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec IBM desktop computer IBM laptop computer Toshiba desktop computer Toshiba laptop computer Logitech mouse Ergo-way mouse 9% 0% −2% 0% 1% 0% −2% 1% 3% 0% 0% 1% 0% 0% 0% 0% −8% −2% −5% −2% 14% 4% 8% 0% 3% 4% 4% 1% −1% −2% 2% 3% 2% 1% 3% 2% −2% −1% −1% −1% 2% 3% 3% 1% 1% 0% 0% 3% −1% −5% 0% 0% −11% 4% 6% 1% 3% 8% −1% −1% −15% −6% −3% −4% −4% −9% −1% −1% −4% −5% −13% 4% 3% 1% 1% 0% 2% 1% 0% −5% 41% 0% 4% 3% 2% −9% −2% −2% −3% −5% 5% 0% −13% −12% −7% −10% −10% −5% −11% −2% 3% −2% 0% −10% 2% 1% 6% −4% −1% −2% Figure 5.17 Change in sales for each item-time combination. Avg. sales Month North South East West Jan Region Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec −1% −1% −1% 4% −3% 1% −2% 0% −1% −9% 2% −1% 0% 6% −3% −3% 3% −1% 1% 5% 4% −39% 18% 1% −7% 9% −2% −18% 1% −34% 11% 8% 0% 4% −3% 5% −3% 1% −2% −8% −3% 7% −1% 1% Figure 5.18 Change in sales for the item IBM desktop computer per region. b/w printers” in September. This cell has a dark background, indicating a high SelfExp value, meaning that the cell is an exception. Consider now the sales difference of −15% for “Sony b/w printers” in November and of −11% in December. The −11% value for December is marked as an exception, while the −15% value is not, even though −15% is a bigger deviation than −11%. This is because the exception indicators consider all the dimensions that a cell is in. Notice that the December sales of most of the other items have a large positive value, while the November sales do not. Therefore, by considering the cell’s position in the cube, the sales difference for “Sony b/w printers” in December is exceptional, while the November sales difference of this item is not. The InExp values can be used to indicate exceptions at lower levels that are not vis- ible at the current level. Consider the cells for “IBM desktop computers” in July and September. These both have a dark, thick box around them, indicating high InExp val- ues. You may decide to further explore the sales of “IBM desktop computers” by drilling down along region. The resulting sales difference by region is shown in Figure 5.18, where the highlight exceptions option has been invoked. The visual cues displayed make it easy to instantly notice an exception for the sales of “IBM desktop computers” in the southern region, where such sales have decreased by −39% and −34% in July and September, 234 Chapter 5 Data Cube Technology respectively. These detailed exceptions were far from obvious when we were viewing the data as an item-time group-by, aggregated over region in Figure 5.17. Thus, the InExp value is useful for searching for exceptions at lower-level cells of the cube. “How are the exception values computed?” The SelfExp, InExp, and PathExp measures are based on a statistical method for table analysis. They take into account all of the group-by’s (aggregations) in which a given cell value participates. A cell value is con- sidered an exception based on how much it differs from its expected value, where its expected value is determined with a statistical model. The difference between a given cell value and its expected value is called a residual. Intuitively, the larger the residual, the more the given cell value is an exception. The comparison of residual values requires us to scale the values based on the expected standard deviation associated with the resid- uals. A cell value is therefore considered an exception if its scaled residual value exceeds a prespeciﬁed threshold. The SelfExp, InExp, and PathExp measures are based on this scaled residual. The expected value of a given cell is a function of the higher-level group-by’s of the given cell. For example, given a cube with the three dimensions A, B, and C, the expected value for a cell at the ith position in A, the jth position in B, and the kth position in C is a function of γ , γ A i , γ B j , γ C k , γ AB ij , γ AC ik , and γ BC jk , which are coefﬁcients of the statistical model used. The coefﬁcients reﬂect how different the values at more detailed levels are, based on generalized impressions formed by looking at higher-level aggregations. In this way, the exception quality of a cell value is based on the exceptions of the values below it. Thus, when seeing an exception, it is natural for the user to further explore the exception by drilling down. “How can the data cube be efﬁciently constructed for discovery-driven exploration?” This computation consists of three phases. The ﬁrst step involves the computation of the aggregate values deﬁning the cube, such as sum or count, over which exceptions will be found. The second phase consists of model ﬁtting, in which the coefﬁcients mentioned before are determined and used to compute the standardized residuals. This phase can be overlapped with the ﬁrst phase because the computations involved are similar. The third phase computes the SelfExp, InExp, and PathExp values, based on the standardized residuals. This phase is computationally similar to phase 1. Therefore, the computation of data cubes for discovery-driven exploration can be done efﬁciently. 5.5 Summary Data cube computation and exploration play an essential role in data warehousing and are important for ﬂexible data mining in multidimensional space. A data cube consists of a lattice of cuboids. Each cuboid corresponds to a different degree of summarization of the given multidimensional data. Full materialization refers to the computation of all the cuboids in a data cube lattice. Partial materi- alization refers to the selective computation of a subset of the cuboid cells in the 5.6 Exercises 235 lattice. Iceberg cubes and shell fragments are examples of partial materialization. An iceberg cube is a data cube that stores only those cube cells that have an aggregate value (e.g., count) above some minimum support threshold. For shell fragments of a data cube, only some cuboids involving a small number of dimensions are com- puted, and queries on additional combinations of the dimensions can be computed on-the-ﬂy. There are several efﬁcient data cube computation methods. In this chapter, we dis- cussed four cube computation methods in detail: (1) MultiWay array aggregation for materializing full data cubes in sparse-array-based, bottom-up, shared computation; (2) BUC for computing iceberg cubes by exploring ordering and sorting for efﬁcient top-down computation; (3) Star-Cubing for computing iceberg cubes by integrating top-down and bottom-up computation using a star-tree structure; and (4) shell- fragment cubing, which supports high-dimensional OLAP by precomputing only the partitioned cube shell fragments. Multidimensional data mining in cube space is the integration of knowledge discov- ery with multidimensional data cubes. It facilitates systematic and focused knowledge discovery in large structured and semi-structured data sets. It will continue to endow analysts with tremendous ﬂexibility and power at multidimensional and multigran- ularity exploratory analysis. This is a vast open area for researchers to build powerful and sophisticated data mining mechanisms. Techniques for processing advanced queries have been proposed that take advantage of cube technology. These include sampling cubes for multidimensional analysis on sampling data, and ranking cubes for efﬁcient top-k (ranking) query processing in large relational data sets. This chapter highlighted three approaches to multidimensional data analysis with data cubes. Prediction cubes compute prediction models in multidimensional cube space. They help users identify interesting data subsets at varying degrees of granularity for effective prediction. Multifeature cubes compute complex queries involving multiple dependent aggregates at multiple granularities. Exception-based, discovery-driven exploration of cube space displays visual cues to indicate discov- ered data exceptions at all aggregation levels, thereby guiding the user in the data analysis process. 5.6 Exercises 5.1 Assume that a 10-D base cuboid contains only three base cells: (1) (a1, d2, d3, d4, ..., d9, d10), (2) (d1,b2, d3, d4,..., d9, d10), and (3) (d1, d2, c3, d4,..., d9, d10), where a1 ̸= d1, b2 ̸= d2, and c3 ̸= d3. The measure of the cube is count( ). (a) How many nonempty cuboids will a full data cube contain? (b) How many nonempty aggregate (i.e., nonbase) cells will a full cube contain? 236 Chapter 5 Data Cube Technology (c) How many nonempty aggregate cells will an iceberg cube contain if the condition of the iceberg cube is “count ≥2”? (d) A cell, c, is a closed cell if there exists no cell, d, such that d is a specialization of cell c (i.e., d is obtained by replacing a ∗in c by a non-∗value) and d has the same measure value as c. A closed cube is a data cube consisting of only closed cells. How many closed cells are in the full cube? 5.2 There are several typical cube computation methods, such as MultiWay [ZDN97], BUC [BR99], and Star-Cubing [XHLW03]. Brieﬂy describe these three methods (i.e., use one or two lines to outline the key points), and compare their feasibility and performance under the following conditions: (a) Computing a dense full cube of low dimensionality (e.g., less than eight dimensions). (b) Computing an iceberg cube of around 10 dimensions with a highly skewed data distribution. (c) Computing a sparse iceberg cube of high dimensionality (e.g., over 100 dimensions). 5.3 Suppose a data cube, C, has D dimensions, and the base cuboid contains k distinct tuples. (a) Present a formula to calculate the minimum number of cells that the cube, C, may contain. (b) Present a formula to calculate the maximum number of cells that C may contain. (c) Answer parts (a) and (b) as if the count in each cube cell must be no less than a threshold, v. (d) Answer parts (a) and (b) as if only closed cells are considered (with the minimum count threshold, v). 5.4 Suppose that a base cuboid has three dimensions, A, B, C, with the following number of cells: |A| = 1,000,000, |B| = 100, and |C| = 1000. Suppose that each dimension is evenly partitioned into 10 portions for chunking. (a) Assuming each dimension has only one level, draw the complete lattice of the cube. (b) If each cube cell stores one measure with four bytes, what is the total size of the computed cube if the cube is dense? (c) State the order for computing the chunks in the cube that requires the least amount of space, and compute the total amount of main memory space required for computing the 2-D planes. 5.5 Often, the aggregate count value of many cells in a large data cuboid is zero, resulting in a huge, yet sparse, multidimensional matrix. (a) Design an implementation method that can elegantly overcome this sparse matrix problem. Note that you need to explain your data structures in detail and discuss the space needed, as well as how to retrieve data from your structures. 5.6 Exercises 237 (b) Modify your design in (a) to handle incremental data updates. Give the reasoning behind your new design. 5.6 When computing a cube of high dimensionality, we encounter the inherent curse of dimensionality problem: There exists a huge number of subsets of combinations of dimensions. (a) Suppose that there are only two base cells, {(a1, a2, a3,..., a100) and (a1, a2, b3,..., b100)}, in a 100-D base cuboid. Compute the number of nonempty aggregate cells. Comment on the storage space and time required to compute these cells. (b) Suppose we are to compute an iceberg cube from (a). If the minimum support count in the iceberg condition is 2, how many aggregate cells will there be in the iceberg cube? Show the cells. (c) Introducing iceberg cubes will lessen the burden of computing trivial aggregate cells in a data cube. However, even with iceberg cubes, we could still end up having to compute a large number of trivial uninteresting cells (i.e., with small counts). Sup- pose that a database has 20 tuples that map to (or cover) the two following base cells in a 100-D base cuboid, each with a cell count of 10: {(a1, a2, a3,..., a100) : 10, (a1, a2, b3,..., b100) : 10}. i. Let the minimum support be