data warehouse may provide a competitive advantage by presenting relevant information from which to measure performance and make critical adjustments to help win over competitors. Second, a data warehouse can enhance business productivity because it is able to quickly and efﬁciently gather information that accurately describes the organi- zation. Third, a data warehouse facilitates customer relationship management because it provides a consistent view of customers and items across all lines of business, all depart- ments, and all markets. Finally, a data warehouse may bring about cost reduction by tracking trends, patterns, and exceptions over long periods in a consistent and reliable manner. To design an effective data warehouse we need to understand and analyze busi- ness needs and construct a business analysis framework. The construction of a large and complex information system can be viewed as the construction of a large and complex building, for which the owner, architect, and builder have different views. These views are combined to form a complex framework that represents the top-down, business-driven, or owner’s perspective, as well as the bottom-up, builder-driven, or implementor’s view of the information system. Four different views regarding a data warehouse design must be considered: the top- down view, the data source view, the data warehouse view, and the business query view. 4.3 Data Warehouse Design and Usage 151 The top-down view allows the selection of the relevant information necessary for the data warehouse. This information matches current and future business needs. The data source view exposes the information being captured, stored, and man- aged by operational systems. This information may be documented at various levels of detail and accuracy, from individual data source tables to integrated data source tables. Data sources are often modeled by traditional data modeling techniques, such as the entity-relationship model or CASE (computer-aided software engineering) tools. The data warehouse view includes fact tables and dimension tables. It represents the information that is stored inside the data warehouse, including precalculated totals and counts, as well as information regarding the source, date, and time of origin, added to provide historical context. Finally, the business query view is the data perspective in the data warehouse from the end-user’s viewpoint. Building and using a data warehouse is a complex task because it requires business skills, technology skills, and program management skills. Regarding business skills, building a data warehouse involves understanding how systems store and manage their data, how to build extractors that transfer data from the operational system to the data warehouse, and how to build warehouse refresh software that keeps the data warehouse reasonably up-to-date with the operational system’s data. Using a data warehouse involves under- standing the signiﬁcance of the data it contains, as well as understanding and translating the business requirements into queries that can be satisﬁed by the data warehouse. Regarding technology skills, data analysts are required to understand how to make assessments from quantitative information and derive facts based on conclusions from historic information in the data warehouse. These skills include the ability to discover patterns and trends, to extrapolate trends based on history and look for anomalies or paradigm shifts, and to present coherent managerial recommendations based on such analysis. Finally, program management skills involve the need to interface with many technologies, vendors, and end-users in order to deliver results in a timely and cost- effective manner. 4.3.2 Data Warehouse Design Process Let’s look at various approaches to the data warehouse design process and the steps involved. A data warehouse can be built using a top-down approach, a bottom-up approach, or a combination of both. The top-down approach starts with overall design and plan- ning. It is useful in cases where the technology is mature and well known, and where the business problems that must be solved are clear and well understood. The bottom- up approach starts with experiments and prototypes. This is useful in the early stage of business modeling and technology development. It allows an organization to move 152 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing forward at considerably less expense and to evaluate the technological beneﬁts before making signiﬁcant commitments. In the combined approach, an organization can exploit the planned and strategic nature of the top-down approach while retaining the rapid implementation and opportunistic application of the bottom-up approach. From the software engineering point of view, the design and construction of a data warehouse may consist of the following steps: planning, requirements study, problem analysis, warehouse design, data integration and testing, and ﬁnally deployment of the data warehouse. Large software systems can be developed using one of two methodo- logies: the waterfall method or the spiral method. The waterfall method performs a structured and systematic analysis at each step before proceeding to the next, which is like a waterfall, falling from one step to the next. The spiral method involves the rapid generation of increasingly functional systems, with short intervals between successive releases. This is considered a good choice for data warehouse development, especially for data marts, because the turnaround time is short, modiﬁcations can be done quickly, and new designs and technologies can be adapted in a timely manner. In general, the warehouse design process consists of the following steps: 1. Choose a business process to model (e.g., orders, invoices, shipments, inventory, account administration, sales, or the general ledger). If the business process is orga- nizational and involves multiple complex object collections, a data warehouse model should be followed. However, if the process is departmental and focuses on the analysis of one kind of business process, a data mart model should be chosen. 2. Choose the business process grain, which is the fundamental, atomic level of data to be represented in the fact table for this process (e.g., individual transactions, individual daily snapshots, and so on). 3. Choose the dimensions that will apply to each fact table record. Typical dimensions are time, item, customer, supplier, warehouse, transaction type, and status. 4. Choose the measures that will populate each fact table record. Typical measures are numeric additive quantities like dollars sold and units sold. Because data warehouse construction is a difﬁcult and long-term task, its imple- mentation scope should be clearly deﬁned. The goals of an initial data warehouse implementation should be speciﬁc, achievable, and measurable. This involves determin- ing the time and budget allocations, the subset of the organization that is to be modeled, the number of data sources selected, and the number and types of departments to be served. Once a data warehouse is designed and constructed, the initial deployment of the warehouse includes initial installation, roll-out planning, training, and orienta- tion. Platform upgrades and maintenance must also be considered. Data warehouse administration includes data refreshment, data source synchronization, planning for disaster recovery, managing access control and security, managing data growth, man- aging database performance, and data warehouse enhancement and extension. Scope 4.3 Data Warehouse Design and Usage 153 management includes controlling the number and range of queries, dimensions, and reports; limiting the data warehouse’s size; or limiting the schedule, budget, or resources. Various kinds of data warehouse design tools are available. Data warehouse development tools provide functions to deﬁne and edit metadata repository contents (e.g., schemas, scripts, or rules), answer queries, output reports, and ship metadata to and from relational database system catalogs. Planning and analysis tools study the impact of schema changes and of refresh performance when changing refresh rates or time windows. 4.3.3 Data Warehouse Usage for Information Processing Data warehouses and data marts are used in a wide range of applications. Business executives use the data in data warehouses and data marts to perform data analysis and make strategic decisions. In many ﬁrms, data warehouses are used as an integral part of a plan-execute-assess “closed-loop” feedback system for enterprise management. Data warehouses are used extensively in banking and ﬁnancial services, consumer goods and retail distribution sectors, and controlled manufacturing such as demand-based production. Typically, the longer a data warehouse has been in use, the more it will have evolved. This evolution takes place throughout a number of phases. Initially, the data warehouse is mainly used for generating reports and answering predeﬁned queries. Progressively, it is used to analyze summarized and detailed data, where the results are presented in the form of reports and charts. Later, the data warehouse is used for strategic purposes, per- forming multidimensional analysis and sophisticated slice-and-dice operations. Finally, the data warehouse may be employed for knowledge discovery and strategic decision making using data mining tools. In this context, the tools for data warehousing can be categorized into access and retrieval tools, database reporting tools, data analysis tools, and data mining tools. Business users need to have the means to know what exists in the data warehouse (through metadata), how to access the contents of the data warehouse, how to examine the contents using analysis tools, and how to present the results of such analysis. There are three kinds of data warehouse applications: information processing, analyti- cal processing, and data mining. Information processing supports querying, basic statistical analysis, and reporting using crosstabs, tables, charts, or graphs. A current trend in data warehouse infor- mation processing is to construct low-cost web-based accessing tools that are then integrated with web browsers. Analytical processing supports basic OLAP operations, including slice-and-dice, drill-down, roll-up, and pivoting. It generally operates on historic data in both sum- marized and detailed forms. The major strength of online analytical processing over information processing is the multidimensional data analysis of data warehouse data. 154 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing Data mining supports knowledge discovery by ﬁnding hidden patterns and associa- tions, constructing analytical models, performing classiﬁcation and prediction, and presenting the mining results using visualization tools. “How does data mining relate to information processing and online analytical process- ing?” Information processing, based on queries, can ﬁnd useful information. However, answers to such queries reﬂect the information directly stored in databases or com- putable by aggregate functions. They do not reﬂect sophisticated patterns or regularities buried in the database. Therefore, information processing is not data mining. Online analytical processing comes a step closer to data mining because it can derive information summarized at multiple granularities from user-speciﬁed subsets of a data warehouse. Such descriptions are equivalent to the class/concept descriptions discussed in Chapter 1. Because data mining systems can also mine generalized class/concept descriptions, this raises some interesting questions: “Do OLAP systems perform data mining? Are OLAP systems actually data mining systems?” The functionalities of OLAP and data mining can be viewed as disjoint: OLAP is a data summarization/aggregation tool that helps simplify data analysis, while data mining allows the automated discovery of implicit patterns and interesting knowledge hidden in large amounts of data. OLAP tools are targeted toward simplifying and supporting interactive data analysis, whereas the goal of data mining tools is to automate as much of the process as possible, while still allowing users to guide the process. In this sense, data mining goes one step beyond traditional online analytical processing. An alternative and broader view of data mining may be adopted in which data mining covers both data description and data modeling. Because OLAP systems can present general descriptions of data from data warehouses, OLAP functions are essentially for user-directed data summarization and comparison (by drilling, pivoting, slicing, dic- ing, and other operations). These are, though limited, data mining functionalities. Yet according to this view, data mining covers a much broader spectrum than simple OLAP operations, because it performs not only data summarization and comparison but also association, classiﬁcation, prediction, clustering, time-series analysis, and other data analysis tasks. Data mining is not conﬁned to the analysis of data stored in data warehouses. It may analyze data existing at more detailed granularities than the summarized data provided in a data warehouse. It may also analyze transactional, spatial, textual, and multimedia data that are difﬁcult to model with current multidimensional database technology. In this context, data mining covers a broader spectrum than OLAP with respect to data mining functionality and the complexity of the data handled. Because data mining involves more automated and deeper analysis than OLAP, it is expected to have broader applications. Data mining can help business managers ﬁnd and reach more suitable customers, as well as gain critical business insights that may help drive market share and raise proﬁts. In addition, data mining can help managers under- stand customer group characteristics and develop optimal pricing strategies accordingly. It can correct item bundling based not on intuition but on actual item groups derived from customer purchase patterns, reduce promotional spending, and at the same time increase the overall net effectiveness of promotions. 4.3 Data Warehouse Design and Usage 155 4.3.4 From Online Analytical Processing to Multidimensional Data Mining The data mining ﬁeld has conducted substantial research regarding mining on vari- ous data types, including relational data, data from data warehouses, transaction data, time-series data, spatial data, text data, and ﬂat ﬁles. Multidimensional data mining (also known as exploratory multidimensional data mining, online analytical mining, or OLAM) integrates OLAP with data mining to uncover knowledge in multidimen- sional databases. Among the many different paradigms and architectures of data mining systems, multidimensional data mining is particularly important for the following reasons: High quality of data in data warehouses: Most data mining tools need to work on integrated, consistent, and cleaned data, which requires costly data cleaning, data integration, and data transformation as preprocessing steps. A data warehouse con- structed by such preprocessing serves as a valuable source of high-quality data for OLAP as well as for data mining. Notice that data mining may serve as a valuable tool for data cleaning and data integration as well. Available information processing infrastructure surrounding data warehouses: Comprehensive information processing and data analysis infrastructures have been or will be systematically constructed surrounding data warehouses, which include accessing, integration, consolidation, and transformation of multiple heterogeneous databases, ODBC/OLEDB connections, Web accessing and service facilities, and reporting and OLAP analysis tools. It is prudent to make the best use of the available infrastructures rather than constructing everything from scratch. OLAP-based exploration of multidimensional data: Effective data mining needs exploratory data analysis. A user will often want to traverse through a database, select portions of relevant data, analyze them at different granularities, and present knowl- edge/results in different forms. Multidimensional data mining provides facilities for mining on different subsets of data and at varying levels of abstraction—by drilling, pivoting, ﬁltering, dicing, and slicing on a data cube and/or intermediate data min- ing results. This, together with data/knowledge visualization tools, greatly enhances the power and ﬂexibility of data mining. Online selection of data mining functions: Users may not always know the speciﬁc kinds of knowledge they want to mine. By integrating OLAP with various data min- ing functions, multidimensional data mining provides users with the ﬂexibility to select desired data mining functions and swap data mining tasks dynamically. Chapter 5 describes data warehouses on a ﬁner level by exploring implementation issues such as data cube computation, OLAP query answering strategies, and multi- dimensional data mining. The chapters following it are devoted to the study of data mining techniques. As we have seen, the introduction to data warehousing and OLAP technology presented in this chapter is essential to our study of data mining. This is because data warehousing provides users with large amounts of clean, organized, 156 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing and summarized data, which greatly facilitates data mining. For example, rather than storing the details of each sales transaction, a data warehouse may store a summary of the transactions per item type for each branch or, summarized to a higher level, for each country. The capability of OLAP to provide multiple and dynamic views of summarized data in a data warehouse sets a solid foundation for successful data mining. Moreover, we also believe that data mining should be a human-centered process. Rather than asking a data mining system to generate patterns and knowledge automati- cally, a user will often need to interact with the system to perform exploratory data analysis. OLAP sets a good example for interactive data analysis and provides the nec- essary preparations for exploratory data mining. Consider the discovery of association patterns, for example. Instead of mining associations at a primitive (i.e., low) data level among transactions, users should be allowed to specify roll-up operations along any dimension. For example, a user may want to roll up on the item dimension to go from viewing the data for particular TV sets that were purchased to viewing the brands of these TVs (e.g., SONY or Toshiba). Users may also navigate from the transaction level to the customer or customer-type level in the search for interesting associations. Such an OLAP data mining style is characteristic of multidimensional data mining. In our study of the principles of data mining in this book, we place particular emphasis on multidimensional data mining, that is, on the integration of data mining and OLAP technology. 4.4 Data Warehouse Implementation Data warehouses contain huge volumes of data. OLAP servers demand that decision support queries be answered in the order of seconds. Therefore, it is crucial for data warehouse systems to support highly efﬁcient cube computation techniques, access methods, and query processing techniques. In this section, we present an overview of methods for the efﬁcient implementation of data warehouse systems. Section 4.4.1 explores how to compute data cubes efﬁciently. Section 4.4.2 shows how OLAP data can be indexed, using either bitmap or join indices. Next, we study how OLAP queries are processed (Section 4.4.3). Finally, Section 4.4.4 presents various types of warehouse servers for OLAP processing. 4.4.1 Efﬁcient Data Cube Computation: An Overview At the core of multidimensional data analysis is the efﬁcient computation of aggrega- tions across many sets of dimensions. In SQL terms, these aggregations are referred to as group-by’s. Each group-by can be represented by a cuboid, where the set of group-by’s forms a lattice of cuboids deﬁning a data cube. In this subsection, we explore issues relating to the efﬁcient computation of data cubes. 4.4 Data Warehouse Implementation 157 The compute cube Operator and the Curse of Dimensionality One approach to cube computation extends SQL so as to include a compute cube oper- ator. The compute cube operator computes aggregates over all subsets of the dimensions speciﬁed in the operation. This can require excessive storage space, especially for large numbers of dimensions. We start with an intuitive look at what is involved in the efﬁcient computation of data cubes. Example 4.6 A data cube is a lattice of cuboids. Suppose that you want to create a data cube for AllElectronics sales that contains the following: city, item, year, and sales in dollars. You want to be able to analyze the data, with queries such as the following: “Compute the sum of sales, grouping by city and item.” “Compute the sum of sales, grouping by city.” “Compute the sum of sales, grouping by item.” What is the total number of cuboids, or group-by’s, that can be computed for this data cube? Taking the three attributes, city, item, and year, as the dimensions for the data cube, and sales in dollars as the measure, the total number of cuboids, or group- by’s, that can be computed for this data cube is 23 = 8. The possible group-by’s are the following: {(city, item, year), (city, item), (city, year), (item, year), (city), (item), (year), ()}, where () means that the group-by is empty (i.e., the dimensions are not grouped). These group-by’s form a lattice of cuboids for the data cube, as shown in Figure 4.14. (item) (year) (city) () (item, year) (city, item, year) (city, item) (city, year) O-D (apex) cuboid 1-D cuboids 2-D cuboids 3-D (base) cuboid Figure 4.14 Lattice of cuboids, making up a 3-D data cube. Each cuboid represents a different group-by. The base cuboid contains city, item, and year dimensions. 158 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing The base cuboid contains all three dimensions, city, item, and year. It can return the total sales for any combination of the three dimensions. The apex cuboid, or 0-D cuboid, refers to the case where the group-by is empty. It contains the total sum of all sales. The base cuboid is the least generalized (most speciﬁc) of the cuboids. The apex cuboid is the most generalized (least speciﬁc) of the cuboids, and is often denoted as all. If we start at the apex cuboid and explore downward in the lattice, this is equivalent to drilling down within the data cube. If we start at the base cuboid and explore upward, this is akin to rolling up. An SQL query containing no group-by (e.g., “compute the sum of total sales”) is a zero- dimensional operation. An SQL query containing one group-by (e.g., “compute the sum of sales, group-by city”) is a one-dimensional operation. A cube operator on n dimensions is equivalent to a collection of group-by statements, one for each subset of the n dimen- sions. Therefore, the cube operator is the n-dimensional generalization of the group-by operator. Similar to the SQL syntax, the data cube in Example 4.1 could be deﬁned as deﬁne cube sales cube [city, item, year]: sum(sales in dollars) For a cube with n dimensions, there are a total of 2n cuboids, including the base cuboid. A statement such as compute cube sales cube would explicitly instruct the system to compute the sales aggregate cuboids for all eight subsets of the set {city, item, year}, including the empty subset. A cube computation operator was ﬁrst proposed and studied by Gray et al. [GCB+97]. Online analytical processing may need to access different cuboids for different queries. Therefore, it may seem like a good idea to compute in advance all or at least some of the cuboids in a data cube. Precomputation leads to fast response time and avoids some redundant computation. Most, if not all, OLAP products resort to some degree of precomputation of multidimensional aggregates. A major challenge related to this precomputation, however, is that the required stor- age space may explode if all the cuboids in a data cube are precomputed, especially when the cube has many dimensions. The storage requirements are even more excessive when many of the dimensions have associated concept hierarchies, each with multiple levels. This problem is referred to as the curse of dimensionality. The extent of the curse of dimensionality is illustrated here. “How many cuboids are there in an n-dimensional data cube?” If there were no hierarchies associated with each dimension, then the total number of cuboids for an n-dimensional data cube, as we have seen, is 2n. However, in practice, many dimensions do have hierarchies. For example, time is usually explored not at only one conceptual level (e.g., year), but rather at multiple conceptual levels such as in the hierarchy “day < month < quarter < year.” For an n-dimensional data cube, the total number of cuboids 4.4 Data Warehouse Implementation 159 that can be generated (including the cuboids generated by climbing up the hierarchies along each dimension) is Total number of cuboids = n Y i=1 (Li + 1), (4.1) where Li is the number of levels associated with dimension i. One is added to Li in Eq. (4.1) to include the virtual top level, all. (Note that generalizing to all is equivalent to the removal of the dimension.) This formula is based on the fact that, at most, one abstraction level in each dimen- sion will appear in a cuboid. For example, the time dimension as speciﬁed before has four conceptual levels, or ﬁve if we include the virtual level all. If the cube has 10 dimen- sions and each dimension has ﬁve levels (including all), the total number of cuboids that can be generated is 510 ≈9.8 × 106. The size of each cuboid also depends on the cardinality (i.e., number of distinct values) of each dimension. For example, if the All- Electronics branch in each city sold every item, there would be |city| × |item| tuples in the city−item group-by alone. As the number of dimensions, number of conceptual hierar- chies, or cardinality increases, the storage space required for many of the group-by’s will grossly exceed the (ﬁxed) size of the input relation. By now, you probably realize that it is unrealistic to precompute and materialize all of the cuboids that can possibly be generated for a data cube (i.e., from a base cuboid). If there are many cuboids, and these cuboids are large in size, a more reasonable option is partial materialization; that is, to materialize only some of the possible cuboids that can be generated. Partial Materialization: Selected Computation of Cuboids There are three choices for data cube materialization given a base cuboid: 1. No materialization: Do not precompute any of the “nonbase” cuboids. This leads to computing expensive multidimensional aggregates on-the-ﬂy, which can be extre- mely slow. 2. Full materialization: Precompute all of the cuboids. The resulting lattice of com- puted cuboids is referred to as the full cube. This choice typically requires huge amounts of memory space in order to store all of the precomputed cuboids. 3. Partial materialization: Selectively compute a proper subset of the whole set of pos- sible cuboids. Alternatively, we may compute a subset of the cube, which contains only those cells that satisfy some user-speciﬁed criterion, such as where the tuple count of each cell is above some threshold. We will use the term subcube to refer to the latter case, where only some of the cells may be precomputed for various cuboids. Partial materialization represents an interesting trade-off between storage space and response time. 160 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing The partial materialization of cuboids or subcubes should consider three factors: (1) identify the subset of cuboids or subcubes to materialize; (2) exploit the materialized cuboids or subcubes during query processing; and (3) efﬁciently update the materialized cuboids or subcubes during load and refresh. The selection of the subset of cuboids or subcubes to materialize should take into account the queries in the workload, their frequencies, and their accessing costs. In addi- tion, it should consider workload characteristics, the cost for incremental updates, and the total storage requirements. The selection must also consider the broad context of physical database design such as the generation and selection of indices. Several OLAP products have adopted heuristic approaches for cuboid and subcube selection. A pop- ular approach is to materialize the cuboids set on which other frequently referenced cuboids are based. Alternatively, we can compute an iceberg cube, which is a data cube that stores only those cube cells with an aggregate value (e.g., count) that is above some minimum support threshold. Another common strategy is to materialize a shell cube. This involves precomput- ing the cuboids for only a small number of dimensions (e.g., three to ﬁve) of a data cube. Queries on additional combinations of the dimensions can be computed on-the- ﬂy. Because our aim in this chapter is to provide a solid introduction and overview of data warehousing for data mining, we defer our detailed discussion of cuboid selection and computation to Chapter 5, which studies various data cube computation methods in greater depth. Once the selected cuboids have been materialized, it is important to take advantage of them during query processing. This involves several issues, such as how to determine the relevant cuboid(s) from among the candidate materialized cuboids, how to use available index structures on the materialized cuboids, and how to transform the OLAP opera- tions onto the selected cuboid(s). These issues are discussed in Section 4.4.3 as well as in Chapter 5. Finally, during load and refresh, the materialized cuboids should be updated efﬁ- ciently. Parallelism and incremental update techniques for this operation should be explored. 4.4.2 Indexing OLAP Data: Bitmap Index and Join Index To facilitate efﬁcient data accessing, most data warehouse systems support index struc- tures and materialized views (using cuboids). General methods to select cuboids for materialization were discussed in Section 4.4.1. In this subsection, we examine how to index OLAP data by bitmap indexing and join indexing. The bitmap indexing method is popular in OLAP products because it allows quick searching in data cubes. The bitmap index is an alternative representation of the record ID (RID) list. In the bitmap index for a given attribute, there is a distinct bit vector, Bv, for each value v in the attribute’s domain. If a given attribute’s domain con- sists of n values, then n bits are needed for each entry in the bitmap index (i.e., there are n bit vectors). If the attribute has the value v for a given row in the data table, then the bit representing that value is set to 1 in the corresponding row of the bitmap index. All other bits for that row are set to 0. 4.4 Data Warehouse Implementation 161 Example 4.7 Bitmap indexing. In the AllElectronics data warehouse, suppose the dimension item at the top level has four values (representing item types): “home entertainment,” “com- puter,” “phone,” and “security.” Each value (e.g., “computer”) is represented by a bit vector in the item bitmap index table. Suppose that the cube is stored as a relation table with 100,000 rows. Because the domain of item consists of four values, the bitmap index table requires four bit vectors (or lists), each with 100,000 bits. Figure 4.15 shows a base (data) table containing the dimensions item and city, and its mapping to bitmap index tables for each of the dimensions. RID item city R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 R6 R7 R8 H C P S H C P S V V V V T T T T Base table Note: H for “home entertainment,” C for “computer,” P for “phone,” S for “security,” V for “Vancouver,” T for “Toronto.” RID H C P S R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 R6 R7 R8 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 item bitmap index table RID V T R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 R6 R7 R8 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 city bitmap index table Figure 4.15 Indexing OLAP data using bitmap indices. Bitmap indexing is advantageous compared to hash and tree indices. It is especially useful for low-cardinality domains because comparison, join, and aggregation opera- tions are then reduced to bit arithmetic, which substantially reduces the processing time. Bitmap indexing leads to signiﬁcant reductions in space and input/output (I/O) since a string of characters can be represented by a single bit. For higher-cardinality domains, the method can be adapted using compression techniques. The join indexing method gained popularity from its use in relational database query processing. Traditional indexing maps the value in a given column to a list of rows having that value. In contrast, join indexing registers the joinable rows of two relations from a relational database. For example, if two relations R(RID, A) and S(B, SID) join on the attributes A and B, then the join index record contains the pair (RID, SID), where RID and SID are record identiﬁers from the R and S relations, respectively. Hence, the join index records can identify joinable tuples without performing costly join operations. Join indexing is especially useful for maintaining the relationship between a foreign key2 and its matching primary keys, from the joinable relation. The star schema model of data warehouses makes join indexing attractive for cross- table search, because the linkage between a fact table and its corresponding dimension tables comprises the fact table’s foreign key and the dimension table’s primary key. Join 2A set of attributes in a relation schema that forms a primary key for another relation schema is called a foreign key. 162 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing indexing maintains relationships between attribute values of a dimension (e.g., within a dimension table) and the corresponding rows in the fact table. Join indices may span multiple dimensions to form composite join indices. We can use join indices to identify subcubes that are of interest. Example 4.8 Join indexing. In Example 3.4, we deﬁned a star schema for AllElectronics of the form “sales star [time, item, branch, location]: dollars sold = sum (sales in dollars).” An exam- ple of a join index relationship between the sales fact table and the location and item dimension tables is shown in Figure 4.16. For example, the “Main Street” value in the location dimension table joins with tuples T57, T238, and T884 of the sales fact table. Similarly, the “Sony-TV” value in the item dimension table joins with tuples T57 and T459 of the sales fact table. The corresponding join index tables are shown in Figure 4.17. location sales item Sony-TV T57 T238 T459 Main Street T884 Figure 4.16 Linkages between a sales fact table and location and item dimension tables. Join index table for location/sales Join index table linking location and item to sales Join index table for item/sales Main Street T57 Main Street T238 Main Street Main Street Sony-TV T57 T884 location sales_key location item sales_key Sony-TV T57 Sony-TV T459 item sales_key Figure 4.17 Join index tables based on the linkages between the sales fact table and the location and item dimension tables shown in Figure 4.16. 4.4 Data Warehouse Implementation 163 Suppose that there are 360 time values, 100 items, 50 branches, 30 locations, and 10 million sales tuples in the sales star data cube. If the sales fact table has recorded sales for only 30 items, the remaining 70 items will obviously not participate in joins. If join indices are not used, additional I/Os have to be performed to bring the joining portions of the fact table and the dimension tables together. To further speed up query processing, the join indexing and the bitmap indexing methods can be integrated to form bitmapped join indices. 4.4.3 Efﬁcient Processing of OLAP Queries The purpose of materializing cuboids and constructing OLAP index structures is to speed up query processing in data cubes. Given materialized views, query processing should proceed as follows: 1. Determine which operations should be performed on the available cuboids: This involves transforming any selection, projection, roll-up (group-by), and drill-down operations speciﬁed in the query into corresponding SQL and/or OLAP operations. For example, slicing and dicing a data cube may correspond to selection and/or projection operations on a materialized cuboid. 2. Determine to which materialized cuboid(s) the relevant operations should be applied: This involves identifying all of the materialized cuboids that may poten- tially be used to answer the query, pruning the set using knowledge of “domi- nance” relationships among the cuboids, estimating the costs of using the remaining materialized cuboids, and selecting the cuboid with the least cost. Example 4.9 OLAP query processing. Suppose that we deﬁne a data cube for AllElectronics of the form “sales cube [time, item, location]: sum(sales in dollars).” The dimension hierarchies used are “day < month < quarter < year” for time; “item name < brand < type” for item; and “street < city < province or state < country” for location. Suppose that the query to be processed is on {brand, province or state}, with the selection constant “year = 2010.” Also, suppose that there are four materialized cuboids available, as follows: cuboid 1: {year, item name, city} cuboid 2: {year, brand, country} cuboid 3: {year, brand, province or state} cuboid 4: {item name, province or state}, where year = 2010 “Which of these four cuboids should be selected to process the query?” Finer-granularity data cannot be generated from coarser-granularity data. Therefore, cuboid 2 cannot be used because country is a more general concept than province or state. Cuboids 1, 3, and 4 can be used to process the query because (1) they have the same set or a superset of the 164 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing dimensions in the query, (2) the selection clause in the query can imply the selection in the cuboid, and (3) the abstraction levels for the item and location dimensions in these cuboids are at a ﬁner level than brand and province or state, respectively. “How would the costs of each cuboid compare if used to process the query?” It is likely that using cuboid 1 would cost the most because both item name and city are at a lower level than the brand and province or state concepts speciﬁed in the query. If there are not many year values associated with items in the cube, but there are several item names for each brand, then cuboid 3 will be smaller than cuboid 4, and thus cuboid 3 should be chosen to process the query. However, if efﬁcient indices are available for cuboid 4, then cuboid 4 may be a better choice. Therefore, some cost-based estimation is required to decide which set of cuboids should be selected for query processing. 4.4.4 OLAP Server Architectures: ROLAP versus MOLAP versus HOLAP Logically, OLAP servers present business users with multidimensional data from data warehouses or data marts, without concerns regarding how or where the data are stored. However, the physical architecture and implementation of OLAP servers must consider data storage issues. Implementations of a warehouse server for OLAP processing include the following: Relational OLAP (ROLAP) servers: These are the intermediate servers that stand in between a relational back-end server and client front-end tools. They use a rela- tional or extended-relational DBMS to store and manage warehouse data, and OLAP middleware to support missing pieces. ROLAP servers include optimization for each DBMS back end, implementation of aggregation navigation logic, and addi- tional tools and services. ROLAP technology tends to have greater scalability than MOLAP technology. The DSS server of Microstrategy, for example, adopts the ROLAP approach. Multidimensional OLAP (MOLAP) servers: These servers support multidimensional data views through array-based multidimensional storage engines. They map multi- dimensional views directly to data cube array structures. The advantage of using a data cube is that it allows fast indexing to precomputed summarized data. Notice that with multidimensional data stores, the storage utilization may be low if the data set is sparse. In such cases, sparse matrix compression techniques should be explored (Chapter 5). Many MOLAP servers adopt a two-level storage representation to handle dense and sparse data sets: Denser subcubes are identiﬁed and stored as array struc- tures, whereas sparse subcubes employ compression technology for efﬁcient storage utilization. Hybrid OLAP (HOLAP) servers: The hybrid OLAP approach combines ROLAP and MOLAP technology, beneﬁting from the greater scalability of ROLAP and the faster computation of MOLAP. For example, a HOLAP server may allow large volumes 4.5 Data Warehouse Implementation 165 of detailed data to be stored in a relational database, while aggregations are kept in a separate MOLAP store. The Microsoft SQL Server 2000 supports a hybrid OLAP server. Specialized SQL servers: To meet the growing demand of OLAP processing in rela- tional databases, some database system vendors implement specialized SQL servers that provide advanced query language and query processing support for SQL queries over star and snowﬂake schemas in a read-only environment. “How are data actually stored in ROLAP and MOLAP architectures?” Let’s ﬁrst look at ROLAP. As its name implies, ROLAP uses relational tables to store data for online analytical processing. Recall that the fact table associated with a base cuboid is referred to as a base fact table. The base fact table stores data at the abstraction level indicated by the join keys in the schema for the given data cube. Aggregated data can also be stored in fact tables, referred to as summary fact tables. Some summary fact tables store both base fact table data and aggregated data (see Example 3.10). Alternatively, separate summary fact tables can be used for each abstraction level to store only aggregated data. Example 4.10 A ROLAP data store. Table 4.4 shows a summary fact table that contains both base fact data and aggregated data. The schema is “⟨record identiﬁer (RID), item, ..., day, month, quarter, year, dollars sold⟩,” where day, month, quarter, and year deﬁne the sales date, and dollars sold is the sales amount. Consider the tuples with an RID of 1001 and 1002, respectively. The data of these tuples are at the base fact level, where the sales dates are October 15, 2010, and October 23, 2010, respectively. Consider the tuple with an RID of 5001. This tuple is at a more general level of abstraction than the tuples 1001 and 1002. The day value has been generalized to all, so that the corresponding time value is October 2010. That is, the dollars sold amount shown is an aggregation representing the entire month of October 2010, rather than just October 15 or 23, 2010. The special value all is used to represent subtotals in summarized data. MOLAP uses multidimensional array structures to store data for online analytical processing. This structure is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 5. Most data warehouse systems adopt a client-server architecture. A relational data store always resides at the data warehouse/data mart server site. A multidimensional data store can reside at either the database server site or the client site. Table 4.4 Single Table for Base and Summary Facts RID item ... day month quarter year dollars sold 1001 TV ... 15 10 Q4 2010 250.60 1002 TV ... 23 10 Q4 2010 175.00 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5001 TV ... all 10 Q4 2010 45,786.08 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 166 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing 4.5 Data Generalization by Attribute-Oriented Induction Conceptually, the data cube can be viewed as a kind of multidimensional data generali- zation. In general, data generalization summarizes data by replacing relatively low-level values (e.g., numeric values for an attribute age) with higher-level concepts (e.g., young, middle-aged, and senior), or by reducing the number of dimensions to summarize data in concept space involving fewer dimensions (e.g., removing birth date and telephone number when summarizing the behavior of a group of students). Given the large amount of data stored in databases, it is useful to be able to describe concepts in concise and suc- cinct terms at generalized (rather than low) levels of abstraction. Allowing data sets to be generalized at multiple levels of abstraction facilitates users in examining the gen- eral behavior of the data. Given the AllElectronics database, for example, instead of examining individual customer transactions, sales managers may prefer to view the data generalized to higher levels, such as summarized by customer groups according to geographic regions, frequency of purchases per group, and customer income. This leads us to the notion of concept description, which is a form of data gene- ralization. A concept typically refers to a data collection such as frequent buyers, grad- uate students, and so on. As a data mining task, concept description is not a simple enumeration of the data. Instead, concept description generates descriptions for data characterization and comparison. It is sometimes called class description when the con- cept to be described refers to a class of objects. Characterization provides a concise and succinct summarization of the given data collection, while concept or class compari- son (also known as discrimination) provides descriptions comparing two or more data collections. Up to this point, we have studied data cube (or OLAP) approaches to concept description using multidimensional, multilevel data generalization in data warehouses. “Is data cube technology sufﬁcient to accomplish all kinds of concept description tasks for large data sets?” Consider the following cases. Complex data types and aggregation: Data warehouses and OLAP tools are based on a multidimensional data model that views data in the form of a data cube, con- sisting of dimensions (or attributes) and measures (aggregate functions). However, many current OLAP systems conﬁne dimensions to non-numeric data and measures to numeric data. In reality, the database can include attributes of various data types, including numeric, non-numeric, spatial, text, or image, which ideally should be included in the concept description. Furthermore, the aggregation of attributes in a database may include sophisticated data types such as the collection of non-numeric data, the merging of spatial regions, the composition of images, the integration of texts, and the grouping of object point- ers. Therefore, OLAP, with its restrictions on the possible dimension and measure types, represents a simpliﬁed model for data analysis. Concept description should handle complex data types of the attributes and their aggregations, as necessary. 4.5 Data Generalization by Attribute-Oriented Induction 167 User control versus automation: Online analytical processing in data warehouses is a user-controlled process. The selection of dimensions and the application of OLAP operations (e.g., drill-down, roll-up, slicing, and dicing) are primarily directed and controlled by users. Although the control in most OLAP systems is quite user- friendly, users do require a good understanding of the role of each dimension. Furthermore, in order to ﬁnd a satisfactory description of the data, users may need to specify a long sequence of OLAP operations. It is often desirable to have a more auto- mated process that helps users determine which dimensions (or attributes) should be included in the analysis, and the degree to which the given data set should be generalized in order to produce an interesting summarization of the data. This section presents an alternative method for concept description, called attribute- oriented induction, which works for complex data types and relies on a data-driven generalization process. 4.5.1 Attribute-Oriented Induction for Data Characterization The attribute-oriented induction (AOI) approach to concept description was ﬁrst pro- posed in 1989, a few years before the introduction of the data cube approach. The data cube approach is essentially based on materialized views of the data, which typically have been precomputed in a data warehouse. In general, it performs ofﬂine aggre- gation before an OLAP or data mining query is submitted for processing. On the other hand, the attribute-oriented induction approach is basically a query-oriented, generalization-based, online data analysis technique. Note that there is no inherent barrier distinguishing the two approaches based on online aggregation versus ofﬂine precomputation. Some aggregations in the data cube can be computed online, while ofﬂine precomputation of multidimensional space can speed up attribute-oriented induction as well. The general idea of attribute-oriented induction is to ﬁrst collect the task-relevant data using a database query and then perform generalization based on the examination of the number of each attribute’s distinct values in the relevant data set. The generali- zation is performed by either attribute removal or attribute generalization. Aggregation is performed by merging identical generalized tuples and accumulating their respec- tive counts. This reduces the size of the generalized data set. The resulting generalized relation can be mapped into different forms (e.g., charts or rules) for presentation to the user. The following illustrates the process of attribute-oriented induction. We ﬁrst discuss its use for characterization. The method is extended for the mining of class comparisons in Section 4.5.3. Example 4.11 A data mining query for characterization. Suppose that a user wants to describe the general characteristics of graduate students in the Big University database, given the attributes name, gender, major, birth place, birth date, residence, phone# (telephone 168 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing number), and gpa (grade point average). A data mining query for this characterization can be expressed in the data mining query language, DMQL, as follows: use Big University DB mine characteristics as “Science Students” in relevance to name, gender, major, birth place, birth date, residence, phone#, gpa from student where status in “graduate” We will see how this example of a typical data mining query can apply attribute-oriented induction to the mining of characteristic descriptions. First, data focusing should be performed before attribute-oriented induction. This step corresponds to the speciﬁcation of the task-relevant data (i.e., data for analysis). The data are collected based on the information provided in the data mining query. Because a data mining query is usually relevant to only a portion of the database, selecting the relevant data set not only makes mining more efﬁcient, but also derives more meaningful results than mining the entire database. Specifying the set of relevant attributes (i.e., attributes for mining, as indicated in DMQL with the in relevance to clause) may be difﬁcult for the user. A user may select only a few attributes that he or she feels are important, while missing others that could also play a role in the description. For example, suppose that the dimension birth place is deﬁned by the attributes city, province or state, and country. Of these attributes, let’s say that the user has only thought to specify city. In order to allow generalization on the birth place dimension, the other attributes deﬁning this dimension should also be included. In other words, having the system automatically include province or state and country as relevant attributes allows city to be generalized to these higher conceptual levels during the induction process. At the other extreme, suppose that the user may have introduced too many attributes by specifying all of the possible attributes with the clause in relevance to ∗. In this case, all of the attributes in the relation speciﬁed by the from clause would be included in the analysis. Many of these attributes are unlikely to contribute to an interesting description. A correlation-based analysis method (Section 3.3.2) can be used to perform attribute relevance analysis and ﬁlter out statistically irrelevant or weakly relevant attributes from the descriptive mining process. Other approaches such as attribute subset selection, are also described in Chapter 3. Table 4.5 Initial Working Relation: A Collection of Task-Relevant Data name gender major birth place birth date residence phone# gpa Jim Woodman M CS Vancouver, BC, Canada 12-8-76 3511 Main St., Richmond 687-4598 3.67 Scott Lachance M CS Montreal, Que, Canada 7-28-75 345 1st Ave., Richmond 253-9106 3.70 Laura Lee F Physics Seattle, WA, USA 8-25-70 125 Austin Ave., Burnaby 420-5232 3.83 ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· 4.5 Data Generalization by Attribute-Oriented Induction 169 “What does the ‘where status in “graduate”’ clause mean?” The where clause implies that a concept hierarchy exists for the attribute status. Such a concept hierarchy organizes primitive-level data values for status (e.g., “M.Sc.,” “M.A.,” “M.B.A.,” “Ph.D.,” “B.Sc.,” and “B.A.”) into higher conceptual levels (e.g., “graduate” and “undergraduate”). This use of concept hierarchies does not appear in traditional relational query languages, yet is likely to become a common feature in data mining query languages. The data mining query presented in Example 4.11 is transformed into the following relational query for the collection of the task-relevant data set: use Big University DB select name, gender, major, birth place, birth date, residence, phone#, gpa from student where status in {“M.Sc.,” “M.A.,” “M.B.A.,” “Ph.D.”} The transformed query is executed against the relational database, Big University DB, and returns the data shown earlier in Table 4.5. This table is called the (task-relevant) initial working relation. It is the data on which induction will be performed. Note that each tuple is, in fact, a conjunction of attribute–value pairs. Hence, we can think of a tuple within a relation as a rule of conjuncts, and of induction on the relation as the generalization of these rules. “Now that the data are ready for attribute-oriented induction, how is attribute-oriented induction performed?” The essential operation of attribute-oriented induction is data generalization, which can be performed in either of two ways on the initial working relation: attribute removal and attribute generalization. Attribute removal is based on the following rule: If there is a large set of distinct values for an attribute of the initial working relation, but either (case 1) there is no generalization operator on the attribute (e.g., there is no concept hierarchy deﬁned for the attribute), or (case 2) its higher-level concepts are expressed in terms of other attributes, then the attribute should be removed from the working relation. Let’s examine the reasoning behind this rule. An attribute–value pair represents a conjunct in a generalized tuple, or rule. The removal of a conjunct eliminates a con- straint and thus generalizes the rule. If, as in case 1, there is a large set of distinct values for an attribute but there is no generalization operator for it, the attribute should be removed because it cannot be generalized. Preserving it would imply keeping a large number of disjuncts, which contradicts the goal of generating concise rules. On the other hand, consider case 2, where the attribute’s higher-level concepts are expressed in terms of other attributes. For example, suppose that the attribute in question is street, with higher-level concepts that are represented by the attributes ⟨city, province or state, country⟩. The removal of street is equivalent to the application of a generalization oper- ator. This rule corresponds to the generalization rule known as dropping condition in the machine learning literature on learning from examples. Attribute generalization is based on the following rule: If there is a large set of distinct values for an attribute in the initial working relation, and there exists a set of generalization operators on the attribute, then a generalization operator should be selected and applied 170 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing to the attribute. This rule is based on the following reasoning. Use of a generalization operator to generalize an attribute value within a tuple, or rule, in the working relation will make the rule cover more of the original data tuples, thus generalizing the concept it represents. This corresponds to the generalization rule known as climbing generalization trees in learning from examples, or concept tree ascension. Both rules–attribute removal and attribute generalization–claim that if there is a large set of distinct values for an attribute, further generalization should be applied. This raises the question: How large is “a large set of distinct values for an attribute” considered to be? Depending on the attributes or application involved, a user may prefer some attributes to remain at a rather low abstraction level while others are generalized to higher levels. The control of how high an attribute should be generalized is typically quite subjective. The control of this process is called attribute generalization control. If the attribute is generalized “too high,” it may lead to overgeneralization, and the resulting rules may not be very informative. On the other hand, if the attribute is not generalized to a “sufﬁciently high level,” then undergeneralization may result, where the rules obtained may not be informative either. Thus, a balance should be attained in attribute-oriented generalization. There are many possible ways to control a generalization process. We will describe two common approaches and illustrate how they work. The ﬁrst technique, called attribute generalization threshold control, either sets one generalization threshold for all of the attributes, or sets one threshold for each attribute. If the number of distinct values in an attribute is greater than the attribute threshold, further attribute removal or attribute generalization should be performed. Data mining systems typically have a default attribute threshold value generally ranging from 2 to 8 and should allow experts and users to modify the threshold values as well. If a user feels that the generalization reaches too high a level for a particular attribute, the threshold can be increased. This corresponds to drilling down along the attribute. Also, to further generalize a relation, the user can reduce an attribute’s threshold, which corresponds to rolling up along the attribute. The second technique, called generalized relation threshold control, sets a threshold for the generalized relation. If the number of (distinct) tuples in the generalized relation is greater than the threshold, further generalization should be performed. Otherwise, no further generalization should be performed. Such a threshold may also be preset in the data mining system (usually within a range of 10 to 30), or set by an expert or user, and should be adjustable. For example, if a user feels that the generalized relation is too small, he or she can increase the threshold, which implies drilling down. Otherwise, to further generalize a relation, the threshold can be reduced, which implies rolling up. These two techniques can be applied in sequence: First apply the attribute threshold control technique to generalize each attribute, and then apply relation threshold control to further reduce the size of the generalized relation. No matter which generalization control technique is applied, the user should be allowed to adjust the generalization thresholds in order to obtain interesting concept descriptions. In many database-oriented induction processes, users are interested in obtaining quantitative or statistical information about the data at different abstraction levels. 4.5 Data Generalization by Attribute-Oriented Induction 171 Thus, it is important to accumulate count and other aggregate values in the induction process. Conceptually, this is performed as follows. The aggregate function, count(), is associated with each database tuple. Its value for each tuple in the initial working relation is initialized to 1. Through attribute removal and attribute generalization, tuples within the initial working relation may be generalized, resulting in groups of identical tuples. In