29.2 + 29.3 + 29.4 10 = 28.61 ˆσ 2 = ((24.1 −28.61)2 + (28.9 −28.61)2 + (28.9 −28.61)2 + (29.0 −28.61)2 + (29.1 −28.61)2 + (29.1 −28.61)2 + (29.2 −28.61)2 + (29.2 −28.61)2 + (29.3 −28.61)2 + (29.4 −28.61)2)/10 ⋍2.29. Accordingly, we have ˆσ = √ 2.29 = 1.51. The most deviating value, 24.0◦C, is 4.61◦C away from the estimated mean. We know that the µ ± 3σ region contains 99.7% data under the assumption of normal 12.3 Statistical Approaches 555 Outlier Max Q3 Median Q1 Min Outliers Figure 12.3 Using a boxplot to visualize outliers. distribution. Because 4.61 1.51 = 3.04 > 3, the probability that the value 24.0◦C is generated by the normal distribution is less than 0.15%, and thus can be identiﬁed as an outlier. Example 12.8 elaborates a simple yet practical outlier detection method. It simply labels any object as an outlier if it is more than 3σ away from the mean of the estimated distribution, where σ is the standard deviation. Such straightforward methods for statistical outlier detection can also be used in visualization. For example, the boxplot method (described in Chapter 2) plots the uni- variate input data using a ﬁve-number summary (Figure 12.3): the smallest nonoutlier value (Min), the lower quartile (Q1), the median (Q2), the upper quartile (Q3), and the largest nonoutlier value (Max). The interquantile range (IQR) is deﬁned as Q3 −Q1. Any object that is more than 1.5 × IQR smaller than Q1 or 1.5 × IQR larger than Q3 is treated as an outlier because the region between Q1 −1.5 × IQR and Q3 + 1.5 × IQR contains 99.3% of the objects. The rationale is similar to using 3σ as the threshold for normal distribution. Another simple statistical method for univariate outlier detection using normal dis- tribution is the Grubb’s test (also known as the maximum normed residual test). For each object x in a data set, we deﬁne a z-score as z = |x −¯x| s , (12.4) where ¯x is the mean, and s is the standard deviation of the input data. An object x is an outlier if z ≥N −1 √ N v u u t t2 α/(2N),N−2 N −2 + t2 α/(2N),N−2 , (12.5) where t2 α/(2N),N−2 is the value taken by a t-distribution at a signiﬁcance level of α/(2N), and N is the number of objects in the data set. 556 Chapter 12 Outlier Detection Detection of Multivariate Outliers Data involving two or more attributes or variables are multivariate data. Many univariate outlier detection methods can be extended to handle multivariate data. The central idea is to transform the multivariate outlier detection task into a univariate outlier detection problem. Here, we use two examples to illustrate this idea. Example 12.9 Multivariate outlier detection using the Mahalanobis distance. For a multivariate data set, let ¯o be the mean vector. For an object, o, in the data set, the Mahalanobis distance from o to ¯o is MDist(o, ¯o) = (o −¯o)TS−1(o −¯o), (12.6) where S is the covariance matrix. MDist(o, ¯o) is a univariate variable, and thus Grubb’s test can be applied to this measure. Therefore, we can transform the multivariate outlier detection tasks as follows: 1. Calculate the mean vector from the multivariate data set. 2. For each object o, calculate MDist(o, ¯o), the Mahalanobis distance from o to ¯o. 3. Detect outliers in the transformed univariate data set, {MDist(o, ¯o)|o ∈D}. 4. If MDist(o, ¯o) is determined to be an outlier, then o is regarded as an outlier as well. Our second example uses the χ2-statistic to measure the distance between an object to the mean of the input data set. Example 12.10 Multivariate outlier detection using the χ2-statistic. The χ2-statistic can also be used to capture multivariate outliers under the assumption of normal distribution. For an object, o, the χ2-statistic is χ2 = n X i=1 (oi −Ei)2 Ei , (12.7) where oi is the value of o on the ith dimension, Ei is the mean of the i-dimension among all objects, and n is the dimensionality. If the χ2-statistic is large, the object is an outlier. Using a Mixture of Parametric Distributions If we assume that the data were generated by a normal distribution, this works well in many situations. However, this assumption may be overly simpliﬁed when the actual data distribution is complex. In such cases, we instead assume that the data were generated by a mixture of parametric distributions. 12.3 Statistical Approaches 557 o C3 C1 C2 Figure 12.4 A complex data set. Example 12.11 Multivariate outlier detection using multiple parametric distributions. Consider the data set in Figure 12.4. There are two big clusters, C1 and C2. To assume that the data are generated by a normal distribution would not work well here. The estimated mean is located between the two clusters and not inside any cluster. The objects between the two clusters cannot be detected as outliers since they are close to the mean. To overcome this problem, we can instead assume that the normal data objects are generated by multiple normal distributions, two in this case. That is, we assume two normal distributions, 21(µ1,σ1) and 22(µ2,σ2). For any object, o, in the data set, the probability that o is generated by the mixture of the two distributions is given by Pr(o|21,22) = f21(o) + f22(o), where f21 and f22 are the probability density functions of 21 and 22, respectively. We can use the expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm (Chapter 11) to learn the param- eters µ1,σ1,µ2,σ2 from the data, as we do in mixture models for clustering. Each cluster is represented by a learned normal distribution. An object, o, is detected as an outlier if it does not belong to any cluster, that is, the probability is very low that it was generated by the combination of the two distributions. Example 12.12 Multivariate outlier detection using multiple clusters. Most of the data objects shown in Figure 12.4 are in either C1 or C2. Other objects, representing noise, are uniformly distributed in the data space. A small cluster, C3, is highly suspicious because it is not close to either of the two major clusters, C1 and C2. The objects in C3 should therefore be detected as outliers. Note that identifying the objects in C3 as outliers is difﬁcult, whether or not we assume that the given data follow a normal distribution or a mixture of multiple dis- tributions. This is because the probability of the objects in C3 will be higher than some of the noise objects, like o in Figure 12.4, due to a higher local density in C3. 558 Chapter 12 Outlier Detection To tackle the problem demonstrated in Example 12.12, we can assume that the nor- mal data objects are generated by a normal distribution, or a mixture of normal distri- butions, whereas the outliers are generated by another distribution. Heuristically, we can add constraints on the distribution that is generating outliers. For example, it is reason- able to assume that this distribution has a larger variance if the outliers are distributed in a larger area. Technically, we can assign σoutlier = kσ, where k is a user-speciﬁed param- eter and σ is the standard deviation of the normal distribution generating the normal data. Again, the EM algorithm can be used to learn the parameters. 12.3.2 Nonparametric Methods In nonparametric methods for outlier detection, the model of “normal data” is learned from the input data, rather than assuming one a priori. Nonparametric methods often make fewer assumptions about the data, and thus can be applicable in more scenarios. Example 12.13 Outlier detection using a histogram. AllElectronics records the purchase amount for every customer transaction. Figure 12.5 uses a histogram (refer to Chapters 2 and 3) to graph these amounts as percentages, given all transactions. For example, 60% of the transaction amounts are between $0.00 and $1000. We can use the histogram as a nonparametric statistical model to capture outliers. For example, a transaction in the amount of $7500 can be regarded as an outlier because only 1 −(60% + 20% + 10% + 6.7% + 3.1%) = 0.2% of transactions have an amount higher than $5000. On the other hand, a transaction amount of $385 can be treated as normal because it falls into the bin (or bucket) holding 60% of the transactions. 20% 0 0−1 1−2 2−3 3−4 4−5 Amount per transaction × $1000 10% 6.7% 3.1% 60% Figure 12.5 Histogram of purchase amounts in transactions. 12.3 Statistical Approaches 559 As illustrated in the previous example, the histogram is a frequently used nonpara- metric statistical model that can be used to detect outliers. The procedure involves the following two steps. Step 1: Histogram construction. In this step, we construct a histogram using the input data (training data). The histogram may be univariate as in Example 12.13, or multivariate if the input data are multidimensional. Note that although nonparametric methods do not assume any a priori statis- tical model, they often do require user-speciﬁed parameters to learn models from data. For example, to construct a good histogram, a user has to specify the type of histogram (e.g., equal width or equal depth) and other parameters (e.g., the number of bins in the histogram or the size of each bin). Unlike parametric methods, these parameters do not specify types of data distribution (e.g., Gaussian). Step 2: Outlier detection. To determine whether an object, o, is an outlier, we can check it against the histogram. In the simplest approach, if the object falls in one of the histogram’s bins, the object is regarded as normal. Otherwise, it is considered an outlier. For a more sophisticated approach, we can use the histogram to assign an out- lier score to the object. In Example 12.13, we can let an object’s outlier score be the inverse of the volume of the bin in which the object falls. For example, the outlier score for a transaction amount of $7500 is 1 0.2% = 500, and that for a transaction amount of $385 is 1 60% = 1.67. The scores indicate that the transaction amount of $7500 is much more likely to be an outlier than that of $385. A drawback to using histograms as a nonparametric model for outlier detection is that it is hard to choose an appropriate bin size. On the one hand, if the bin size is set too small, many normal objects may end up in empty or rare bins, and thus be misidentiﬁed as outliers. This leads to a high false positive rate and low precision. On the other hand, if the bin size is set too high, outlier objects may inﬁltrate into some frequent bins and thus be “disguised” as normal. This leads to a high false negative rate and low recall. To overcome this problem, we can adopt kernel density estimation to estimate the probability density distribution of the data. We treat an observed object as an indica- tor of high probability density in the surrounding region. The probability density at a point depends on the distances from this point to the observed objects. We use a kernel function to model the inﬂuence of a sample point within its neighborhood. A kernel K() is a non-negative real-valued integrable function that satisﬁes the following two conditions: R +∞ −∞K(u)du = 1. K(−u) = K(u) for all values of u. A frequently used kernel is a standard Gaussian function with mean 0 and variance 1: K x −xi h  = 1 √ 2π e−(x−xi)2 2h2 . (12.8) 560 Chapter 12 Outlier Detection Let x1,...,xn be an independent and identically distributed sample of a random variable f . The kernel density approximation of the probability density function is ˆfh(x) = 1 nh n X i=1 K x −xi h  , (12.9) where K() is a kernel and h is the bandwidth serving as a smoothing parameter. Once the probability density function of a data set is approximated through kernel density estimation, we can use the estimated density function ˆf to detect outliers. For an object, o, ˆf (o) gives the estimated probability that the object is generated by the stochas- tic process. If ˆf (o) is high, then the object is likely normal. Otherwise, o is likely an outlier. This step is often similar to the corresponding step in parametric methods. In summary, statistical methods for outlier detection learn models from data to dis- tinguish normal data objects from outliers. An advantage of using statistical methods is that the outlier detection may be statistically justiﬁable. Of course, this is true only if the statistical assumption made about the underlying data meets the constraints in reality. The data distribution of high-dimensional data is often complicated and hard to fully understand. Consequently, statistical methods for outlier detection on high- dimensional data remain a big challenge. Outlier detection for high-dimensional data is further addressed in Section 12.8. The computational cost of statistical methods depends on the models. When simple parametric models are used (e.g., a Gaussian), ﬁtting the parameters typically takes lin- ear time. When more sophisticated models are used (e.g., mixture models, where the EM algorithm is used in learning), approximating the best parameter values often takes several iterations. Each iteration, however, is typically linear with respect to the data set’s size. For kernel density estimation, the model learning cost can be up to quadratic. Once the model is learned, the outlier detection cost is often very small per object. 12.4 Proximity-Based Approaches Given a set of objects in feature space, a distance measure can be used to quantify the similarity between objects. Intuitively, objects that are far from others can be regarded as outliers. Proximity-based approaches assume that the proximity of an outlier object to its nearest neighbors signiﬁcantly deviates from the proximity of the object to most of the other objects in the data set. There are two types of proximity-based outlier detection methods: distance-based and density-based methods. A distance-based outlier detection method consults the neighborhood of an object, which is deﬁned by a given radius. An object is then consid- ered an outlier if its neighborhood does not have enough other points. A density-based outlier detection method investigates the density of an object and that of its neighbors. Here, an object is identiﬁed as an outlier if its density is relatively much lower than that of its neighbors. Let’s start with distance-based outliers. 12.4 Proximity-Based Approaches 561 12.4.1 Distance-Based Outlier Detection and a Nested Loop Method A representative method of proximity-based outlier detection uses the concept of distance-based outliers. For a set, D, of data objects to be analyzed, a user can spec- ify a distance threshold, r, to deﬁne a reasonable neighborhood of an object. For each object, o, we can examine the number of other objects in the r-neighborhood of o. If most of the objects in D are far from o, that is, not in the r-neighborhood of o, then o can be regarded as an outlier. Formally, let r (r ≥0) be a distance threshold and π (0 < π ≤1) be a fraction threshold. An object, o, is a DB(r,π)-outlier if ∥{o′|dist(o,o′) ≤r}∥ ∥D∥ ≤π, (12.10) where dist(·,·) is a distance measure. Equivalently, we can determine whether an object, o, is a DB(r,π)-outlier by checking the distance between o and its k-nearest neighbor, ok, where k = ⌈π∥D∥⌉. Object o is an outlier if dist(o,ok) > r, because in such a case, there are fewer than k objects except for o that are in the r-neighborhood of o. “How can we compute DB(r,π)-outliers?” A straightforward approach is to use nested loops to check the r-neighborhood for every object, as shown in Figure 12.6. For any object, oi (1 ≤i ≤n), we calculate the distance between oi and the other object, and count the number of other objects in the r-neighborhood of oi. Once we ﬁnd π · n other Algorithm: Distance-based outlier detection. Input: a set of objects D = {o1,...,on}, threshold r (r > 0) and π (0 < π ≤1); Output: DB(r,π) outliers in D. Method: for i = 1 to n do count ←0 for j = 1 to n do if i ̸= j and dist(oi,oj) ≤r then count ←count + 1 if count ≥π · n then exit {oi cannot be a DB(r,π) outlier} endif endif endfor print oi {oi is a DB(r,π) outlier according to (Eq. 12.10)} endfor; Figure 12.6 Nested loop algorithm for DB(r,π)-outlier detection. 562 Chapter 12 Outlier Detection objects within a distance r from oi, the inner loop can be terminated because oi already violates (Eq. 12.10), and thus is not a DB(r,π)-outlier. On the other hand, if the inner loop completes for oi, this means that oi has less than π · n neighbors in a radius of r, and thus is a DB(r,π)-outlier. The straightforward nested loop approach takes O(n2) time. Surprisingly, the actual CPU runtime is often linear with respect to the data set size. For most nonoutlier objects, the inner loop terminates early when the number of outliers in the data set is small, which should be the case most of the time. Correspondingly, only a small fraction of the data set is examined. When mining large data sets where the complete set of objects cannot be held in main memory, the nested loop approach is still costly. Suppose the main memory has m pages for the mining. Instead of conducting the inner loop object by object, in such a case, the outer loop uses m −1 pages to hold as many objects as possible and uses the remaining one page to run the inner loop. The inner loop cannot stop until all objects in the m −1 pages are identiﬁed as not being outliers, which is very unlikely to happen. Correspondingly, it is likely that the algorithm has to incur O(( n b)2) input/output (I/O) cost, where b is the number of objects that can be held in one page. The major cost in the nested loop method comes from two aspects. First, to check whether an object is an outlier, the nested loop method tests the object against the whole data set. To improve, we need to explore how to determine the outlierness of an object from the neighbors that are close to the object. Second, the nested loop method checks objects one by one. To improve, we should try to group objects according to their proximity, and check the outlierness of objects group by group most of the time. Section 12.4.2 introduces how to implement the preceding ideas. 12.4.2 A Grid-Based Method CELL is a grid-based method for distance-based outlier detection. In this method, the data space is partitioned into a multidimensional grid, where each cell is a hypercube that has a diagonal of length r 2, where r is a distance threshold parameter. In other words, if there are l dimensions, the length of each edge of a cell is r 2 √ l . Consider a 2-D data set, for example. Figure 12.7 shows part of the grid. The length of each edge of a cell is r 2 √ 2. Consider the cell C in Figure 12.7. The neighboring cells of C can be divided into two groups. The cells immediately next to C constitute the level-1 cells (labeled “1” in the ﬁgure), and the cells one or two cells away from C in any direction constitute the level-2 cells (labeled “2” in the ﬁgure). The two levels of cells have the following properties: Level-1 cell property: Given any possible point, x of C, and any possible point, y, in a level-1 cell, then dist(x,y) ≤r. Level-2 cell property: Given any possible point, x of C, and any point, y, such that dist(x,y) ≥r, then y is in a level-2 cell. 12.4 Proximity-Based Approaches 563 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 C 1 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 2 2 Figure 12.7 Grids in the CELL method. Let a be the number of objects in cell C, b1 be the total number of objects in the level-1 cells, and b2 be the total number of objects in the level-2 cells. We can apply the following rules. Level-1 cell pruning rule: Based on the level-1 cell property, if a + b1 > ⌈πn⌉, then every object o in C is not a DB(r,π)-outlier because all those objects in C and the level-1 cells are in the r-neighborhood of o, and there are at least ⌈πn⌉such neighbors. Level-2 cell pruning rule: Based on the level-2 cell property, if a + b1 + b2 < ⌈πn⌉+1, then all objects in C are DB(r,π)-outliers because each of their r- neighborhoods has less than ⌈πn⌉other objects. Using the preceding two rules, the CELL method organizes objects into groups using a grid—all objects in a cell form a group. For groups satisfying one of the two rules, we can determine that either all objects in a cell are outliers or nonoutliers, and thus do not need to check those objects one by one. Moreover, to apply the two rules, we need only check a limited number of cells close to a target cell instead of the whole data set. Using the previous two rules, many objects can be determined as being either nonoutliers or outliers. We only need to check the objects that cannot be pruned using the two rules. Even for such an object, o, we need only compute the distance between o and the objects in the level-2 cells with respect to o. This is because all objects in the level-1 cells have a distance of at most r to o, and all objects not in a level-1 or level-2 cell must have a distance of more than r from o, and thus cannot be in the r-neighbor- hood of o. When the data set is very large so that most of the data are stored on disk, the CELL method may incur many random accesses to disk, which is costly. An alternative method was proposed, which uses a very small amount of main memory (around 1% of the data 564 Chapter 12 Outlier Detection set) to mine all outliers by scanning the data set three times. First, a sample, S, is created of the given data set, D, using sampling by replacement. Each object in S is considered the centroid of a partition. The objects in D are assigned to the partitions based on distance. The preceding steps are completed in one scan of D. Candidate outliers are identiﬁed in a second scan of D. After a third scan, all DB(r,π)-outliers have been found. 12.4.3 Density-Based Outlier Detection Distance-based outliers, such as DB(r,π)-outliers, are just one type of outlier. Speciﬁ- cally, distance-based outlier detection takes a global view of the data set. Such outliers can be regarded as “global outliers” for two reasons: A DB(r,π)-outlier, for example, is far (as quantiﬁed by parameter r) from at least (1 −π) × 100% of the objects in the data set. In other words, an outlier as such is remote from the majority of the data. To detect distance-based outliers, we need two global parameters, r and π, which are applied to every outlier object. Many real-world data sets demonstrate a more complex structure, where objects may be considered outliers with respect to their local neighborhoods, rather than with respect to the global data distribution. Let’s look at an example. Example 12.14 Local proximity-based outliers. Consider the data points in Figure 12.8. There are two clusters: C1 is dense, and C2 is sparse. Object o3 can be detected as a distance-based outlier because it is far from the majority of the data set. Now, let’s consider objects o1 and o2. Are they outliers? On the one hand, the distance from o1 and o2 to the objects in the dense cluster, C1, is smaller than the average dis- tance between an object in cluster C2 and its nearest neighbor. Thus, o1 and o2 are not distance-based outliers. In fact, if we were to categorize o1 and o2 as DB(r,π)-outliers, we would have to classify all the objects in clusters C2 as DB(r,π)-outliers. On the other hand, o1 and o2 can be identiﬁed as outliers when they are considered locally with respect to cluster C1 because o1 and o2 deviate signiﬁcantly from the objects in C1. Moreover, o1 and o2 are also far from the objects in C2. o1 o4 C2 C1 o2 o3 Figure 12.8 Global outliers and local outliers. 12.4 Proximity-Based Approaches 565 To summarize, distance-based outlier detection methods cannot capture local out- liers like o1 and o2. Note that the distance between object o4 and its nearest neighbors is much greater than the distance between o1 and its nearest neighbors. However, because o4 is local to cluster C2 (which is sparse), o4 is not considered a local outlier. “How can we formulate the local outliers as illustrated in Example 12.14?” The critical idea here is that we need to compare the density around an object with the density around its local neighbors. The basic assumption of density-based outlier detection methods is that the density around a nonoutlier object is similar to the density around its neighbors, while the density around an outlier object is signiﬁcantly different from the density around its neighbors. Based on the preceding, density-based outlier detection methods use the relative den- sity of an object against its neighbors to indicate the degree to which an object is an outlier. Now, let’s consider how to measure the relative density of an object, o, given a set of objects, D. The k-distance of o, denoted by distk(o), is the distance, dist(o, p), between o and another object, p ∈D, such that There are at least k objects o′ ∈D−{o} such that dist(o, o′) ≤dist(o, p). There are at most k −1 objects o′′ ∈D−{o} such that dist(o, o′′)< dist(o, p). In other words, distk(o) is the distance between o and its k-nearest neighbor. Conse- quently, the k-distance neighborhood of o contains all objects of which the distance to o is not greater than distk(o), the k-distance of o, denoted by Nk(o) = {o′|o′ ∈D,dist(o,o′) ≤distk(o)}. (12.11) Note that Nk(o) may contain more than k objects because multiple objects may each be the same distance away from o. We can use the average distance from the objects in Nk(o) to o as the measure of the local density of o. However, such a straightforward measure has a problem: If o has very close neighbors o′ such that dist(o, o′) is very small, the statistical ﬂuctuations of the distance measure can be undesirably high. To overcome this problem, we can switch to the following reachability distance measure by adding a smoothing effect. For two objects, o and o′, the reachability distance from o′ to o is dist(o ←o′) if dist (o, o′) > distk(o), and distk(o) otherwise. That is, reachdistk(o ←o′) = max{distk(o),dist(o,o′)}. (12.12) Here, k is a user-speciﬁed parameter that controls the smoothing effect. Essentially, k speciﬁes the minimum neighborhood to be examined to determine the local density of an object. Importantly, reachability distance is not symmetric, that is, in general, reachdistk(o ←o′) ̸= reachdistk(o′ ←o). 566 Chapter 12 Outlier Detection Now, we can deﬁne the local reachability density of an object, o, as lrdk(o) = ∥Nk(o)∥ P o′∈Nk(o) reachdistk(o′ ←o). (12.13) There is a critical difference between the density measure here for outlier detection and that in density-based clustering (Section 12.5). In density-based clustering, to deter- mine whether an object can be considered a core object in a density-based cluster, we use two parameters: a radius parameter, r, to specify the range of the neighborhood, and the minimum number of points in the r-neighborhood. Both parameters are global and are applied to every object. In contrast, as motivated by the observation that relative density is the key to ﬁnding local outliers, we use the parameter k to quantify the neighborhood and do not need to specify the minimum number of objects in the neighborhood as a requirement of density. We instead calculate the local reachability density for an object and compare it with that of its neighbors to quantify the degree to which the object is considered an outlier. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne the local outlier factor of an object o as LOFk(o)= P o′∈Nk(o) lrdk(o′) lrdk(o) ∥Nk(o)∥ = X o′∈Nk(o) lrdk(o′) · X o′∈Nk(o) reachdistk(o′ ←o). (12.14) In other words, the local outlier factor is the average of the ratio of the local reachability density of o and those of o’s k-nearest neighbors. The lower the local reachability density of o (i.e., the smaller the item P o′∈Nk(o) reachdistk(o′ ←o)) and the higher the local reachability densities of the k-nearest neighbors of o, the higher the LOF value is. This exactly captures a local outlier of which the local density is relatively low compared to the local densities of its k-nearest neighbors. The local outlier factor has some nice properties. First, for an object deep within a consistent cluster, such as the points in the center of cluster C2 in Figure 12.8, the local outlier factor is close to 1. This property ensures that objects inside clusters, no matter whether the cluster is dense or sparse, will not be mislabeled as outliers. Second, for an object o, the meaning of LOF(o) is easy to understand. Consider the objects in Figure 12.9, for example. For object o, let directmin(o) = min{reachdistk(o′ ←o)|o′ ∈Nk(o)} (12.15) be the minimum reachability distance from o to its k-nearest neighbors. Similarly, we can deﬁne directmax(o) = max{reachdistk(o′ ←o)|o′ ∈Nk(o)}. (12.16) We also consider the neighbors of o’s k-nearest neighbors. Let indirectmin(o) = min{reachdistk(o′′ ←o′)|o′ ∈Nk(o) and o′′ ∈Nk(o′)} (12.17) 12.5 Clustering-Based Approaches 567 k =3 indirectmax directmin directmax indirectmin C o Figure 12.9 A property of LOF(o). and indirectmax(o) = max{reachdistk(o′′ ←o′)|o′ ∈Nk(o) and o′′ ∈Nk(o′)}. (12.18) Then, it can be shown that LOF(o) is bounded as directmin(o) indirectmax(o) ≤LOF(o) ≤directmax(o) indirectmin(o). (12.19) This result clearly shows that LOF captures the relative density of an object. 12.5 Clustering-Based Approaches The notion of outliers is highly related to that of clusters. Clustering-based approaches detect outliers by examining the relationship between objects and clusters. Intuitively, an outlier is an object that belongs to a small and remote cluster, or does not belong to any cluster. This leads to three general approaches to clustering-based outlier detection. Consider an object. Does the object belong to any cluster? If not, then it is identiﬁed as an outlier. Is there a large distance between the object and the cluster to which it is closest? If yes, it is an outlier. Is the object part of a small or sparse cluster? If yes, then all the objects in that cluster are outliers. 568 Chapter 12 Outlier Detection Let’s look at examples of each of these approaches. Example 12.15 Detecting outliers as objects that do not belong to any cluster. Gregarious animals (e.g., goats and deer) live and move in ﬂocks. Using outlier detection, we can iden- tify outliers as animals that are not part of a ﬂock. Such animals may be either lost or wounded. In Figure 12.10, each point represents an animal living in a group. Using a density- based clustering method, such as DBSCAN, we note that the black points belong to clusters. The white point, a, does not belong to any cluster, and thus is declared an outlier. The second approach to clustering-based outlier detection considers the distance between an object and the cluster to which it is closest. If the distance is large, then the object is likely an outlier with respect to the cluster. Thus, this approach detects individual outliers with respect to clusters. Example 12.16 Clustering-based outlier detection using distance to the closest cluster. Using the k-means clustering method, we can partition the data points shown in Figure 12.11 into three clusters, as shown using different symbols. The center of each cluster is marked with a +. For each object, o, we can assign an outlier score to the object according to the dis- tance between the object and the center that is closest to the object. Suppose the closest center to o is co; then the distance between o and co is dist(o, co), and the average a Figure 12.10 Object a is an outlier because it does not belong to any cluster.  Cluster centers a b c Figure 12.11 Outliers (a,b,c) are far from the clusters to which they are closest (with respect to the cluster centers). 12.5 Clustering-Based Approaches 569 distance between co and the objects assigned to o is lco. The ratio dist(o,co) lco measures how dist(o, co) stands out from the average. The larger the ratio, the farther away o is relative from the center, and the more likely o is an outlier. In Figure 12.11, points a, b, and c are relatively far away from their corresponding centers, and thus are suspected of being outliers. This approach can also be used for intrusion detection, as described in Example 12.17. Example 12.17 Intrusion detection by clustering-based outlier detection. A bootstrap method was developed to detect intrusions in TCP connection data by considering the similarity between data points and the clusters in a training data set. The method consists of three steps. 1. A training data set is used to ﬁnd patterns of normal data. Speciﬁcally, the TCP con- nection data are segmented according to, say, dates. Frequent itemsets are found in each segment. The frequent itemsets that are in a majority of the segments are considered patterns of normal data and are referred to as “base connections.” 2. Connections in the training data that contain base connections are treated as attack- free. Such connections are clustered into groups. 3. The data points in the original data set are compared with the clusters mined in step 2. Any point that is deemed an outlier with respect to the clusters is declared as a possible attack. Note that each of the approaches we have seen so far detects only individual objects as outliers because they compare objects one at a time against clusters in the data set. However, in a large data set, some outliers may be similar and form a small cluster. In intrusion detection, for example, hackers who use similar tactics to attack a system may form a cluster. The approaches discussed so far may be deceived by such outliers. To overcome this problem, a third approach to cluster-based outlier detection identi- ﬁes small or sparse clusters and declares the objects in those clusters to be outliers as well. An example of this approach is the FindCBLOF algorithm, which works as follows. 1. Find clusters in a data set, and sort them according to decreasing size. The algo- rithm assumes that most of the data points are not outliers. It uses a parameter α (0 ≤α ≤1) to distinguish large from small clusters. Any cluster that contains at least a percentage α (e.g., α = 90%) of the data set is considered a “large cluster.” The remaining clusters are referred to as “small clusters.” 2. To each data point, assign a cluster-based local outlier factor (CBLOF). For a point belonging to a large cluster, its CBLOF is the product of the cluster’s size and the similarity between the point and the cluster. For a point belonging to a small cluster, its CBLOF is calculated as the product of the size of the small cluster and the similarity between the point and the closest large cluster. 570 Chapter 12 Outlier Detection CBLOF deﬁnes the similarity between a point and a cluster in a statistical way that represents the probability that the point belongs to the cluster. The larger the value, the more similar the point and the cluster are. The CBLOF score can detect outlier points that are far from any clusters. In addition, small clusters that are far from any large cluster are considered to consist of outliers. The points with the lowest CBLOF scores are suspected outliers. Example 12.18 Detecting outliers in small clusters. The data points in Figure 12.12 form three clusters: large clusters, C1 and C2, and a small cluster, C3. Object o does not belong to any cluster. Using CBLOF, FindCBLOF can identify o as well as the points in cluster C3 as outliers. For o, the closest large cluster is C1. The CBLOF is simply the similarity between o and C1, which is small. For the points in C3, the closest large cluster is C2. Although there are three points in cluster C3, the similarity between those points and cluster C2 is low, and |C3| = 3 is small; thus, the CBLOF scores of points in C3 are small. Clustering-based approaches may incur high computational costs if they have to ﬁnd clusters before detecting outliers. Several techniques have been developed for improved efﬁciency. For example, ﬁxed-width clustering is a linear-time technique that is used in some outlier detection methods. The idea is simple yet efﬁcient. A point is assigned to a cluster if the center of the cluster is within a predeﬁned distance threshold from the point. If a point cannot be assigned to any existing cluster, a new cluster is created. The distance threshold may be learned from the training data under certain conditions. Clustering-based outlier detection methods have the following advantages. First, they can detect outliers without requiring any labeled data, that is, in an unsupervised way. They work for many data types. Clusters can be regarded as summaries of the data. Once the clusters are obtained, clustering-based methods need only compare any object against the clusters to determine whether the object is an outlier. This process is typically fast because the number of clusters is usually small compared to the total number of objects. o C1 C2 C3 Figure 12.12 Outliers in small clusters. 12.6 Classiﬁcation-Based Approaches 571 A weakness of clustering-based outlier detection is its effectiveness, which depends highly on the clustering method used. Such methods may not be optimized for outlier detection. Clustering methods are often costly for large data sets, which can serve as a bottleneck. 12.6 Classiﬁcation-Based Approaches Outlier detection can be treated as a classiﬁcation problem if a training data set with class labels is available. The general idea of classiﬁcation-based outlier detection methods is to train a classiﬁcation model that can distinguish normal data from outliers. Consider a training set that contains samples labeled as “normal” and others labeled as “outlier.” A classiﬁer can then be constructed based on the training set. Any classi- ﬁcation method can be used (Chapters 8 and 9). This kind of brute-force approach, however, does not work well for outlier detection because the training set is typically heavily biased. That is, the number of normal samples likely far exceeds the number of outlier samples. This imbalance, where the number of outlier samples may be insufﬁ- cient, can prevent us from building an accurate classiﬁer. Consider intrusion detection in a system, for example. Because most system accesses are normal, it is easy to obtain a good representation of the normal events. However, it is infeasible to enumerate all potential intrusions, as new and unexpected attempts occur from time to time. Hence, we are left with an insufﬁcient representation of the outlier (or intrusion) samples. To overcome this challenge, classiﬁcation-based outlier detection methods often use a one-class model. That is, a classiﬁer is built to describe only the normal class. Any samples that do not belong to the normal class are regarded as outliers. Example 12.19 Outlier detection using a one-class model. Consider the training set shown in Figure 12.13, where white points are samples labeled as “normal” and black points are samples labeled as “outlier.” To build a model for outlier detection, we can learn the decision boundary of the normal class using classiﬁcation methods such as SVM (Chapter 9), as illustrated. Given a new object, if the object is within the decision bound- ary of the normal class, it is treated as a normal case. If the object is outside the decision boundary, it is declared an outlier. An advantage of using only the model of the normal class to detect outliers is that the model can detect new outliers that may not appear close to any outlier objects in the training set. This occurs as long as such new outliers fall outside the decision boundary of the normal class. The idea of using the decision boundary of the normal class can be extended to handle situations where the normal objects may belong to multiple classes such as in fuzzy clustering (Chapter 11). For example, AllElectronics accepts returned items. Cus- tomers can return items for a number of reasons (corresponding to class categories) such as “product design defects” and “product damaged during shipment.” Each such 572 Chapter 12 Outlier Detection Figure 12.13 Learning a model for the normal class. Objects without label Objects with label “normal” Objects with label “outlier” C C1 a Figure 12.14 Detecting outliers by semi-supervised learning. class is regarded as normal. To detect outlier cases, AllElectronics can learn a model for each normal class. To determine whether a case is an outlier, we can run each model on the case. If the case does not ﬁt any of the models, then it is declared an outlier. Classiﬁcation-based methods and clustering-based methods can be combined to detect outliers in a semi-supervised learning way. Example 12.20 Outlier detection by semi-supervised learning. Consider Figure 12.14, where objects are labeled as either “normal” or “outlier,” or have no label at all. Using a clustering- based approach, we ﬁnd a large cluster, C, and a small cluster, C1. Because some objects in C carry the label “normal,” we can treat all objects in this cluster (including those without labels) as normal objects. We use the one-class model of this cluster to identify normal objects in outlier detection. Similarly, because some objects in cluster C1 carry the label “outlier,” we declare all objects in C1 as outliers. Any object that does not fall into the model for C (e.g., a) is considered an outlier as well. 12.7 Mining Contextual and Collective Outliers 573 Classiﬁcation-based methods can incorporate human domain knowledge into the detection process by learning from the labeled samples. Once the classiﬁcation model is constructed, the outlier detection process is fast. It only needs to compare the objects to be examined against the model learned from the training data. The quality of classiﬁcation-based methods heavily depends on the availability and quality of the train- ing set. In many applications, it is difﬁcult to obtain representative and high-quality training data, which limits the applicability of classiﬁcation-based methods. 12.7 Mining Contextual and Collective Outliers An object in a given data set is a contextual outlier (or conditional outlier) if it devi- ates signiﬁcantly with respect to a speciﬁc context of the object (Section 12.1). The context is deﬁned using contextual attributes. These depend heavily on the applica- tion, and are often provided by users as part of the contextual outlier detection task. Contextual attributes can include spatial attributes, time, network locations, and sophis- ticated structured attributes. In addition, behavioral attributes deﬁne characteristics of the object, and are used to evaluate whether the object is an outlier in the context to which it belongs. Example 12.21 Contextual outliers. To determine whether the temperature of a location is exceptional (i.e., an outlier), the attributes specifying information about the location can serve as contextual attributes. These attributes may be spatial attributes (e.g., longitude and lati- tude) or location attributes in a graph or network. The attribute time can also be used. In customer-relationship management, whether a customer is an outlier may depend on other customers with similar proﬁles. Here, the attributes deﬁning customer proﬁles provide the context for outlier detection. In comparison to outlier detection in general, identifying contextual outliers requires analyzing the corresponding contextual information. Contextual outlier detection methods can be divided into two categories according to whether the contexts can be clearly identiﬁed. 12.7.1 Transforming Contextual Outlier Detection to Conventional Outlier Detection This category of methods is for situations where the contexts can be clearly identiﬁed. The idea is to transform the contextual outlier detection problem into a typical outlier detection problem. Speciﬁcally, for a given data object, we can evaluate whether the object is an outlier in two steps. In the ﬁrst step, we identify the context of the object using the contextual attributes. In the second step, we calculate the outlier score for the object in the context using a conventional outlier detection method. 574 Chapter 12 Outlier Detection Example 12.22 Contextual outlier detection when the context can be clearly identiﬁed. In customer- relationship management, we can detect outlier customers in the context of customer groups. Suppose AllElectronics maintains customer information on four attributes, namely age group (i.e., under 25, 25-45, 45-65, and over 65), postal code, number of transactions per year, and annual total transaction amount. The attributes age group and postal code serve as contextual attributes, and the attributes number of transactions per year and annual total transaction amount are behavioral attributes. To detect contextual outliers in this setting, for a customer, c, we can ﬁrst locate the context of c using the attributes age group and postal code. We can then compare c with the other customers in the same group, and use a conventional outlier detection method, such as some of the ones discussed earlier, to determine whether c is an outlier. Contexts may be speciﬁed at different levels of granularity. Suppose AllElectronics maintains customer information at a more detailed level for the attributes age, postal code, number of transactions per year, and annual total transaction amount. We can still group customers on age and postal code, and then mine outliers in each group. What if the number of customers falling into a group is very small or even zero? For a customer, c, if the corresponding context contains very few or even no other customers, the evaluation of whether c is an outlier using the exact context is unreliable or even impossible. To overcome this challenge, we can assume that customers of similar age and who live within the same area should have similar normal behavior. This assumption can help to generalize contexts and makes for more effective outlier detection. For example, using a set of training data, we may learn a mixture model, U, of the data on the con- textual attributes, and another mixture model, V, of the data on the behavior attributes. A mapping p(Vi|Uj) is also learned to capture the probability that a data object o belong- ing to cluster Uj on the contextual attributes is generated by cluster Vi on the behavior attributes. The outlier score can then be calculated as S(o) = X Uj p(o ∈Uj) X Vi p(o ∈Vi)p(Vi|Uj). (12.20) Thus, the contextual outlier problem is transformed into outlier detection using mix- ture models. 12.7.2 Modeling Normal Behavior with Respect to Contexts In some applications, it is inconvenient or infeasible to clearly partition the data into contexts. For example, consider the situation where the online store of AllElectronics records customer browsing behavior in a search log. For each customer, the data log con- tains the sequence of products searched for and browsed by the customer. AllElectronics is interested in contextual outlier behavior, such as if a customer suddenly purchased a product that is unrelated to those she recently browsed. However, in this application, contexts cannot be easily speciﬁed because it is unclear how many products browsed 12.7 Mining Contextual and Collective Outliers 575 earlier should be considered as the context, and this number will likely differ for each product. This second category of contextual outlier detection methods models the normal behavior with respect to contexts. Using a training data set, such a method trains a model that predicts the expected behavior attribute values with respect to the contextual attribute values. To determine whether a data object is a contextual outlier, we can then apply the model to the contextual attributes of the object. If the behavior attribute val- ues of the object signiﬁcantly deviate from the values predicted by the model, then the object can be declared a contextual outlier. By using a prediction model that links the contexts and behavior, these methods avoid the explicit identiﬁcation of speciﬁc contexts. A number of classiﬁcation and prediction techniques can be used to build such models such as regression, Markov models, and ﬁnite state automaton. Interested readers are referred to Chapters 8 and 9 on classiﬁcation and the bibliographic notes for further details (Section 12.11). In summary, contextual outlier detection enhances conventional outlier detection by considering contexts, which are important in many applications. We may be able to detect outliers that cannot be detected otherwise. Consider a credit card user whose income level is low but whose expenditure patterns are similar to those of millionaires. This user can be detected as a contextual outlier if the income level is used to deﬁne context. Such a user may not be detected as an outlier without contextual information because she does share expenditure patterns with many mil- lionaires. Considering contexts in outlier detection can also help to avoid false alarms. Without considering the context, a millionaire’s purchase transaction may be falsely detected as an outlier if the majority of customers in the training set are not mil- lionaires. This can be corrected by incorporating contextual information in outlier detection. 12.7.3 Mining Collective Outliers A group of data objects forms a collective outlier if the objects as a whole deviate sig- niﬁcantly from the entire data set, even though each individual object in the group may not be an outlier (Section 12.1). To detect collective outliers, we have to examine the structure of the data set, that is, the relationships between multiple data objects. This makes the problem more difﬁcult than conventional and contextual outlier detection. “How can we explore the data set structure?” This typically depends on the nature of the data. For outlier detection in temporal data (e.g., time series and sequences), we explore the structures formed by time, which occur in segments of the time series or sub- sequences. To detect collective outliers in spatial data, we explore local areas. Similarly, in graph and network data, we explore subgraphs. Each of these structures is inherent to its respective data type. Contextual outlier detection and collective outlier detection are similar in that they both explore structures. In contextual outlier detection, the structures are the contexts, as speciﬁed by the contextual attributes explicitly. The critical difference in collective outlier detection is that the structures are often not explicitly deﬁned, and have to be discovered as part of the outlier detection process. 576 Chapter 12 Outlier Detection As with contextual outlier detection, collective outlier detection methods can also be divided into two categories. The ﬁrst category consists of methods that reduce the prob- lem to conventional outlier detection. Its strategy is to identify structure units, treat each structure unit (e.g., a subsequence, a time-series segment, a local area, or a subgraph) as a data object, and extract features. The problem of collective outlier detection is thus transformed into outlier detection on the set of “structured objects” constructed as such using the extracted features. A structure unit, which represents a group of objects in the original data set, is a collective outlier if the structure unit deviates signiﬁcantly from the expected trend in the space of the extracted features. Example 12.23 Collective outlier detection on graph data. Let’s see how we can detect collective out- liers in AllElectronics’ online social network of customers. Suppose we treat the social network as an unlabeled graph. We then treat each possible subgraph of the network as a structure unit. For each subgraph, S, let |S| be the number of vertices in S, and freq(S) be the frequency of S in the network. That is, freq(S) is the number of different subgraphs in the network that are isomorphic to S. We can use these two features to detect outlier subgraphs. An outlier subgraph is a collective outlier that contains multiple vertices. In general, a small subgraph (e.g., a single vertex or a pair of vertices connected by an edge) is expected to be frequent, and a large subgraph is expected to be infrequent. Using the preceding simple method, we can detect small subgraphs that are of very low frequency or large subgraphs that are surprisingly frequent. These are outlier structures in the social network. Predeﬁning the structure units for collective outlier detection can be difﬁcult or impossible. Consequently, the second category of methods models the expected behav- ior of structure units directly. For example, to detect collective outliers in temporal sequences, one method is to learn a Markov model from the sequences. A subsequence can then be declared as a collective outlier if it signiﬁcantly deviates from the model. In summary, collective outlier detection is subtle due to the challenge of explor- ing the structures in data. The exploration typically uses heuristics, and thus may be application-dependent. The computational cost is often high due to the sophisticated mining process. While highly useful in practice, collective outlier detection remains a challenging direction that calls for further research and development. 12.8 Outlier Detection in High-Dimensional Data In some applications, we may need to detect outliers in high-dimensional data. The dimensionality curse poses huge challenges for effective outlier detection. As the dimen- sionality increases, the distance between objects may be heavily dominated by noise. That is, the distance and similarity between two points in a high-dimensional space may not reﬂect the real relationship between the points. Consequently, conventional outlier detection methods, which mainly use proximity or density to identify outliers, deteriorate as dimensionality increases. 12.8 Outlier Detection in High-Dimensional Data 577 Ideally, outlier detection methods for high-dimensional data should meet the chal- lenges that follow. Interpretation of outliers: They should be able to not only detect outliers, but also provide an interpretation of the outliers. Because many features (or dimensions) are involved in a high-dimensional data set, detecting outliers without providing any interpretation as to why they are outliers is not very useful. The interpretation of outliers may come from, for example, speciﬁc subspaces that manifest the outliers or an assessment regarding the “outlier-ness” of the objects. Such interpretation can help users to understand the possible meaning and signiﬁcance of the outliers. Data sparsity: The methods should be capable of handling sparsity in high- dimensional spaces. The distance between objects becomes heavily dominated by noise as the dimensionality increases. Therefore, data in high-dimensional spaces are often sparse. Data subspaces: They should model outliers appropriately, for example, adaptive to the subspaces signifying the outliers and capturing the local behavior of data. Using a ﬁxed-distance threshold against all subspaces to detect outliers is not a good idea because the distance between two objects monotonically increases as the dimensionality increases. Scalability with respect to dimensionality: As the dimensionality increases, the number of subspaces increases exponentially. An exhaustive combinatorial explo- ration of the search space, which contains all possible subspaces, is not a scalable choice. Outlier detection methods for high-dimensional data can be divided into three main approaches. These include extending conventional outlier detection (Section 12.8.1), ﬁnding outliers in subspaces (Section 12.8.2), and modeling high-dimensional outliers (Section 12.8.3). 12.8.1 Extending Conventional Outlier Detection One approach for outlier detection in high-dimensional data extends conventional out- lier detection methods. It uses the conventional proximity-based models of outliers. However, to overcome the deterioration of proximity measures in high-dimensional spaces, it uses alternative measures or constructs subspaces and detects outliers there. The HilOut algorithm is an example of this approach. HilOut ﬁnds distance-based outliers, but uses the ranks of distance instead of the absolute distance in outlier detec- tion. Speciﬁcally, for each object, o, HilOut ﬁnds the k-nearest neighbors of o, denoted by nn1(o),...,nnk(o), where k is an application-dependent parameter. The weight of object o is deﬁned as w(o) = k X i=1 dist(o,nni(o)). (12.21) 578 Chapter 12 Outlier Detection All objects are ranked in weight-descending order. The top-l objects in weight are output as outliers, where l is another user-speciﬁed parameter. Computing the k-nearest neighbors for every object is costly and does not scale up when the dimensionality is high and the database is large. To address the scalability issue, HilOut employs space-ﬁlling curves to achieve an approximation algorithm, which is scalable in both running time and space with respect to database size and dimensionality. While some methods like HilOut detect outliers in the full space despite the high dimensionality, other methods reduce the high-dimensional outlier detection prob- lem to a lower-dimensional one by dimensionality reduction (Chapter 3). The idea is to reduce the high-dimensional space to a lower-dimensional space where normal instances can still be distinguished from outliers. If such a