χ2 contingency table statis- tic, and the uncertainty coefﬁcient (Johnson and Wichern [JW92]). For a comparison of attribute selection measures for decision tree induction, see Buntine and Niblett [BN92]. For additional methods, see Liu and Motoda [LM98a], Dash and Liu [DL97], and Almuallim and Dietterich [AD91]. Liu et al. [LHTD02] performed a comprehensive survey of data discretization methods. Entropy-based discretization with the C4.5 algorithm is described in Quin- lan [Qui93]. In Catlett [Cat91], the D-2 system binarizes a numeric feature recursively. ChiMerge by Kerber [Ker92] and Chi2 by Liu and Setiono [LS95] are methods for the automatic discretization of numeric attributes that both employ the χ2 statistic. Fayyad and Irani [FI93] apply the minimum description length principle to determine the num- ber of intervals for numeric discretization. Concept hierarchies and their automatic generation from categorical data are described in Han and Fu [HF94]. 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing Data warehouses generalize and consolidate data in multidimensional space. The construction of data warehouses involves data cleaning, data integration, and data transformation, and can be viewed as an important preprocessing step for data mining. Moreover, data warehouses provide online analytical processing (OLAP) tools for the interactive analysis of multidimensional data of varied granularities, which facilitates effective data gene- ralization and data mining. Many other data mining functions, such as association, classiﬁcation, prediction, and clustering, can be integrated with OLAP operations to enhance interactive mining of knowledge at multiple levels of abstraction. Hence, the data warehouse has become an increasingly important platform for data analysis and OLAP and will provide an effective platform for data mining. Therefore, data warehous- ing and OLAP form an essential step in the knowledge discovery process. This chapter presents an overview of data warehouse and OLAP technology. This overview is essential for understanding the overall data mining and knowledge discovery process. In this chapter, we study a well-accepted deﬁnition of the data warehouse and see why more and more organizations are building data warehouses for the analysis of their data (Section 4.1). In particular, we study the data cube, a multidimensional data model for data warehouses and OLAP, as well as OLAP operations such as roll-up, drill- down, slicing, and dicing (Section 4.2). We also look at data warehouse design and usage (Section 4.3). In addition, we discuss multidimensional data mining, a power- ful paradigm that integrates data warehouse and OLAP technology with that of data mining. An overview of data warehouse implementation examines general strategies for efﬁcient data cube computation, OLAP data indexing, and OLAP query process- ing (Section 4.4). Finally, we study data generalization by attribute-oriented induction (Section 4.5). This method uses concept hierarchies to generalize data to multiple levels of abstraction. 4.1 Data Warehouse: Basic Concepts This section gives an introduction to data warehouses. We begin with a deﬁnition of the data warehouse (Section 4.1.1). We outline the differences between operational database c⃝2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques 125 126 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing systems and data warehouses (Section 4.1.2), then explain the need for using data ware- houses for data analysis, rather than performing the analysis directly on traditional databases (Section 4.1.3). This is followed by a presentation of data warehouse architec- ture (Section 4.1.4). Next, we study three data warehouse models—an enterprise model, a data mart, and a virtual warehouse (Section 4.1.5). Section 4.1.6 describes back-end utilities for data warehousing, such as extraction, transformation, and loading. Finally, Section 4.1.7 presents the metadata repository, which stores data about data. 4.1.1 What Is a Data Warehouse? Data warehousing provides architectures and tools for business executives to system- atically organize, understand, and use their data to make strategic decisions. Data warehouse systems are valuable tools in today’s competitive, fast-evolving world. In the last several years, many ﬁrms have spent millions of dollars in building enterprise-wide data warehouses. Many people feel that with competition mounting in every industry, data warehousing is the latest must-have marketing weapon—a way to retain customers by learning more about their needs. “Then, what exactly is a data warehouse?” Data warehouses have been deﬁned in many ways, making it difﬁcult to formulate a rigorous deﬁnition. Loosely speaking, a data warehouse refers to a data repository that is maintained separately from an organiza- tion’s operational databases. Data warehouse systems allow for integration of a variety of application systems. They support information processing by providing a solid platform of consolidated historic data for analysis. According to William H. Inmon, a leading architect in the construction of data warehouse systems, “A data warehouse is a subject-oriented, integrated, time-variant, and nonvolatile collection of data in support of management’s decision making pro- cess” [Inm96]. This short but comprehensive deﬁnition presents the major features of a data warehouse. The four keywords—subject-oriented, integrated, time-variant, and nonvolatile—distinguish data warehouses from other data repository systems, such as relational database systems, transaction processing systems, and ﬁle systems. Let’s take a closer look at each of these key features. Subject-oriented: A data warehouse is organized around major subjects such as cus- tomer, supplier, product, and sales. Rather than concentrating on the day-to-day operations and transaction processing of an organization, a data warehouse focuses on the modeling and analysis of data for decision makers. Hence, data warehouses typically provide a simple and concise view of particular subject issues by excluding data that are not useful in the decision support process. Integrated: A data warehouse is usually constructed by integrating multiple hetero- geneous sources, such as relational databases, ﬂat ﬁles, and online transaction records. Data cleaning and data integration techniques are applied to ensure con- sistency in naming conventions, encoding structures, attribute measures, and so on. 4.1 Data Warehouse: Basic Concepts 127 Time-variant: Data are stored to provide information from an historic perspective (e.g., the past 5–10 years). Every key structure in the data warehouse contains, either implicitly or explicitly, a time element. Nonvolatile: A data warehouse is always a physically separate store of data trans- formed from the application data found in the operational environment. Due to this separation, a data warehouse does not require transaction processing, recovery, and concurrency control mechanisms. It usually requires only two operations in data accessing: initial loading of data and access of data. In sum, a data warehouse is a semantically consistent data store that serves as a physical implementation of a decision support data model. It stores the information an enterprise needs to make strategic decisions. A data warehouse is also often viewed as an architecture, constructed by integrating data from multiple heterogeneous sources to support structured and/or ad hoc queries, analytical reporting, and decision making. Based on this information, we view data warehousing as the process of construct- ing and using data warehouses. The construction of a data warehouse requires data cleaning, data integration, and data consolidation. The utilization of a data warehouse often necessitates a collection of decision support technologies. This allows “knowledge workers” (e.g., managers, analysts, and executives) to use the warehouse to quickly and conveniently obtain an overview of the data, and to make sound decisions based on information in the warehouse. Some authors use the term data warehousing to refer only to the process of data warehouse construction, while the term warehouse DBMS is used to refer to the management and utilization of data warehouses. We will not make this distinction here. “How are organizations using the information from data warehouses?” Many orga- nizations use this information to support business decision-making activities, includ- ing (1) increasing customer focus, which includes the analysis of customer buying patterns (such as buying preference, buying time, budget cycles, and appetites for spending); (2) repositioning products and managing product portfolios by compar- ing the performance of sales by quarter, by year, and by geographic regions in order to ﬁne-tune production strategies; (3) analyzing operations and looking for sources of proﬁt; and (4) managing customer relationships, making environmental corrections, and managing the cost of corporate assets. Data warehousing is also very useful from the point of view of heterogeneous database integration. Organizations typically collect diverse kinds of data and maintain large databases from multiple, heterogeneous, autonomous, and distributed information sources. It is highly desirable, yet challenging, to integrate such data and provide easy and efﬁcient access to it. Much effort has been spent in the database industry and research community toward achieving this goal. The traditional database approach to heterogeneous database integration is to build wrappers and integrators (or mediators) on top of multiple, heterogeneous databases. When a query is posed to a client site, a metadata dictionary is used to translate the query into queries appropriate for the individual heterogeneous sites involved. These 128 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing queries are then mapped and sent to local query processors. The results returned from the different sites are integrated into a global answer set. This query-driven approach requires complex information ﬁltering and integration processes, and competes with local sites for processing resources. It is inefﬁcient and potentially expensive for frequent queries, especially queries requiring aggregations. Data warehousing provides an interesting alternative to this traditional approach. Rather than using a query-driven approach, data warehousing employs an update- driven approach in which information from multiple, heterogeneous sources is inte- grated in advance and stored in a warehouse for direct querying and analysis. Unlike online transaction processing databases, data warehouses do not contain the most cur- rent information. However, a data warehouse brings high performance to the integrated heterogeneous database system because data are copied, preprocessed, integrated, anno- tated, summarized, and restructured into one semantic data store. Furthermore, query processing in data warehouses does not interfere with the processing at local sources. Moreover, data warehouses can store and integrate historic information and support complex multidimensional queries. As a result, data warehousing has become popular in industry. 4.1.2 Differences between Operational Database Systems and Data Warehouses Because most people are familiar with commercial relational database systems, it is easy to understand what a data warehouse is by comparing these two kinds of systems. The major task of online operational database systems is to perform online trans- action and query processing. These systems are called online transaction processing (OLTP) systems. They cover most of the day-to-day operations of an organization such as purchasing, inventory, manufacturing, banking, payroll, registration, and account- ing. Data warehouse systems, on the other hand, serve users or knowledge workers in the role of data analysis and decision making. Such systems can organize and present data in various formats in order to accommodate the diverse needs of different users. These systems are known as online analytical processing (OLAP) systems. The major distinguishing features of OLTP and OLAP are summarized as follows: Users and system orientation: An OLTP system is customer-oriented and is used for transaction and query processing by clerks, clients, and information technology professionals. An OLAP system is market-oriented and is used for data analysis by knowledge workers, including managers, executives, and analysts. Data contents: An OLTP system manages current data that, typically, are too detailed to be easily used for decision making. An OLAP system manages large amounts of historic data, provides facilities for summarization and aggregation, and stores and manages information at different levels of granularity. These features make the data easier to use for informed decision making. 4.1 Data Warehouse: Basic Concepts 129 Database design: An OLTP system usually adopts an entity-relationship (ER) data model and an application-oriented database design. An OLAP system typically adopts either a star or a snowﬂake model (see Section 4.2.2) and a subject-oriented database design. View: An OLTP system focuses mainly on the current data within an enterprise or department, without referring to historic data or data in different organizations. In contrast, an OLAP system often spans multiple versions of a database schema, due to the evolutionary process of an organization. OLAP systems also deal with informa- tion that originates from different organizations, integrating information from many data stores. Because of their huge volume, OLAP data are stored on multiple storage media. Access patterns: The access patterns of an OLTP system consist mainly of short, atomic transactions. Such a system requires concurrency control and recovery mech- anisms. However, accesses to OLAP systems are mostly read-only operations (because most data warehouses store historic rather than up-to-date information), although many could be complex queries. Other features that distinguish between OLTP and OLAP systems include database size, frequency of operations, and performance metrics. These are summarized in Table 4.1. 4.1.3 But, Why Have a Separate Data Warehouse? Because operational databases store huge amounts of data, you may wonder, “Why not perform online analytical processing directly on such databases instead of spending addi- tional time and resources to construct a separate data warehouse?” A major reason for such a separation is to help promote the high performance of both systems. An operational database is designed and tuned from known tasks and workloads like indexing and hashing using primary keys, searching for particular records, and optimizing “canned” queries. On the other hand, data warehouse queries are often complex. They involve the computation of large data groups at summarized levels, and may require the use of spe- cial data organization, access, and implementation methods based on multidimensional views. Processing OLAP queries in operational databases would substantially degrade the performance of operational tasks. Moreover, an operational database supports the concurrent processing of multiple transactions. Concurrency control and recovery mechanisms (e.g., locking and logging) are required to ensure the consistency and robustness of transactions. An OLAP query often needs read-only access of data records for summarization and aggregation. Con- currency control and recovery mechanisms, if applied for such OLAP operations, may jeopardize the execution of concurrent transactions and thus substantially reduce the throughput of an OLTP system. Finally, the separation of operational databases from data warehouses is based on the different structures, contents, and uses of the data in these two systems. Decision 130 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing Table 4.1 Comparison of OLTP and OLAP Systems Feature OLTP OLAP Characteristic operational processing informational processing Orientation transaction analysis User clerk, DBA, database professional knowledge worker (e.g., manager, executive, analyst) Function day-to-day operations long-term informational requirements decision support DB design ER-based, application-oriented star/snowﬂake, subject-oriented Data current, guaranteed up-to-date historic, accuracy maintained over time Summarization primitive, highly detailed summarized, consolidated View detailed, ﬂat relational summarized, multidimensional Unit of work short, simple transaction complex query Access read/write mostly read Focus data in information out Operations index/hash on primary key lots of scans Number of records accessed tens millions Number of users thousands hundreds DB size GB to high-order GB ≥TB Priority high performance, high availability high ﬂexibility, end-user autonomy Metric transaction throughput query throughput, response time Note: Table is partially based on Chaudhuri and Dayal [CD97]. support requires historic data, whereas operational databases do not typically maintain historic data. In this context, the data in operational databases, though abundant, are usually far from complete for decision making. Decision support requires consolidation (e.g., aggregation and summarization) of data from heterogeneous sources, resulting in high-quality, clean, integrated data. In contrast, operational databases contain only detailed raw data, such as transactions, which need to be consolidated before analy- sis. Because the two systems provide quite different functionalities and require different kinds of data, it is presently necessary to maintain separate databases. However, many vendors of operational relational database management systems are beginning to opti- mize such systems to support OLAP queries. As this trend continues, the separation between OLTP and OLAP systems is expected to decrease. 4.1.4 Data Warehousing: A Multitiered Architecture Data warehouses often adopt a three-tier architecture, as presented in Figure 4.1. 4.1 Data Warehouse: Basic Concepts 131 Query/report Analysis Data mining OLAP server OLAP server Top tier: Front-end tools Middle tier: OLAP server Bottom tier: Data warehouse server Data Output Extract Clean Transform Load Refresh Data warehouse Data marts Monitoring Metadata repository Operational databases External sources Administration Figure 4.1 A three-tier data warehousing architecture. 1. The bottom tier is a warehouse database server that is almost always a relational database system. Back-end tools and utilities are used to feed data into the bot- tom tier from operational databases or other external sources (e.g., customer proﬁle information provided by external consultants). These tools and utilities perform data extraction, cleaning, and transformation (e.g., to merge similar data from different sources into a uniﬁed format), as well as load and refresh functions to update the data warehouse (see Section 4.1.6). The data are extracted using application pro- gram interfaces known as gateways. A gateway is supported by the underlying DBMS and allows client programs to generate SQL code to be executed at a server. Exam- ples of gateways include ODBC (Open Database Connection) and OLEDB (Object 132 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing Linking and Embedding Database) by Microsoft and JDBC (Java Database Connec- tion). This tier also contains a metadata repository, which stores information about the data warehouse and its contents. The metadata repository is further described in Section 4.1.7. 2. The middle tier is an OLAP server that is typically implemented using either (1) a relational OLAP (ROLAP) model (i.e., an extended relational DBMS that maps oper- ations on multidimensional data to standard relational operations); or (2) a multi- dimensional OLAP (MOLAP) model (i.e., a special-purpose server that directly implements multidimensional data and operations). OLAP servers are discussed in Section 4.4.4. 3. The top tier is a front-end client layer, which contains query and reporting tools, analysis tools, and/or data mining tools (e.g., trend analysis, prediction, and so on). 4.1.5 Data Warehouse Models: Enterprise Warehouse, Data Mart, and Virtual Warehouse From the architecture point of view, there are three data warehouse models: the enterprise warehouse, the data mart, and the virtual warehouse. Enterprise warehouse: An enterprise warehouse collects all of the information about subjects spanning the entire organization. It provides corporate-wide data inte- gration, usually from one or more operational systems or external information providers, and is cross-functional in scope. It typically contains detailed data as well as summarized data, and can range in size from a few gigabytes to hundreds of gigabytes, terabytes, or beyond. An enterprise data warehouse may be imple- mented on traditional mainframes, computer superservers, or parallel architecture platforms. It requires extensive business modeling and may take years to design and build. Data mart: A data mart contains a subset of corporate-wide data that is of value to a speciﬁc group of users. The scope is conﬁned to speciﬁc selected subjects. For exam- ple, a marketing data mart may conﬁne its subjects to customer, item, and sales. The data contained in data marts tend to be summarized. Data marts are usually implemented on low-cost departmental servers that are Unix/Linux or Windows based. The implementation cycle of a data mart is more likely to be measured in weeks rather than months or years. However, it may involve complex integration in the long run if its design and planning were not enterprise-wide. Depending on the source of data, data marts can be categorized as independent or dependent. Independent data marts are sourced from data captured from one or more operational systems or external information providers, or from data generated locally within a particular department or geographic area. Dependent data marts are sourced directly from enterprise data warehouses. 4.1 Data Warehouse: Basic Concepts 133 Virtual warehouse: A virtual warehouse is a set of views over operational databases. For efﬁcient query processing, only some of the possible summary views may be materialized. A virtual warehouse is easy to build but requires excess capacity on operational database servers. “What are the pros and cons of the top-down and bottom-up approaches to data ware- house development?” The top-down development of an enterprise warehouse serves as a systematic solution and minimizes integration problems. However, it is expensive, takes a long time to develop, and lacks ﬂexibility due to the difﬁculty in achieving consistency and consensus for a common data model for the entire organization. The bottom- up approach to the design, development, and deployment of independent data marts provides ﬂexibility, low cost, and rapid return of investment. It, however, can lead to problems when integrating various disparate data marts into a consistent enterprise data warehouse. A recommended method for the development of data warehouse systems is to imple- ment the warehouse in an incremental and evolutionary manner, as shown in Figure 4.2. First, a high-level corporate data model is deﬁned within a reasonably short period (such as one or two months) that provides a corporate-wide, consistent, integrated view of data among different subjects and potential usages. This high-level model, although it will need to be reﬁned in the further development of enterprise data ware- houses and departmental data marts, will greatly reduce future integration problems. Second, independent data marts can be implemented in parallel with the enterprise Enterprise data warehouse Multitier data warehouse Distributed data marts Data mart Define a high-level corporate data model Data mart Model refinement Model refinement Figure 4.2 A recommended approach for data warehouse development. 134 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing warehouse based on the same corporate data model set noted before. Third, distributed data marts can be constructed to integrate different data marts via hub servers. Finally, a multitier data warehouse is constructed where the enterprise warehouse is the sole custodian of all warehouse data, which is then distributed to the various dependent data marts. 4.1.6 Extraction, Transformation, and Loading Data warehouse systems use back-end tools and utilities to populate and refresh their data (Figure 4.1). These tools and utilities include the following functions: Data extraction, which typically gathers data from multiple, heterogeneous, and external sources. Data cleaning, which detects errors in the data and rectiﬁes them when possible. Data transformation, which converts data from legacy or host format to warehouse format. Load, which sorts, summarizes, consolidates, computes views, checks integrity, and builds indices and partitions. Refresh, which propagates the updates from the data sources to the warehouse. Besides cleaning, loading, refreshing, and metadata deﬁnition tools, data warehouse systems usually provide a good set of data warehouse management tools. Data cleaning and data transformation are important steps in improving the data quality and, subsequently, the data mining results (see Chapter 3). Because we are mostly interested in the aspects of data warehousing technology related to data mining, we will not get into the details of the remaining tools, and recommend interested readers to consult books dedicated to data warehousing technology. 4.1.7 Metadata Repository Metadata are data about data. When used in a data warehouse, metadata are the data that deﬁne warehouse objects. Figure 4.1 showed a metadata repository within the bot- tom tier of the data warehousing architecture. Metadata are created for the data names and deﬁnitions of the given warehouse. Additional metadata are created and captured for timestamping any extracted data, the source of the extracted data, and missing ﬁelds that have been added by data cleaning or integration processes. A metadata repository should contain the following: A description of the data warehouse structure, which includes the warehouse schema, view, dimensions, hierarchies, and derived data deﬁnitions, as well as data mart locations and contents. 4.2 Data Warehouse Modeling: Data Cube and OLAP 135 Operational metadata, which include data lineage (history of migrated data and the sequence of transformations applied to it), currency of data (active, archived, or purged), and monitoring information (warehouse usage statistics, error reports, and audit trails). The algorithms used for summarization, which include measure and dimension deﬁnition algorithms, data on granularity, partitions, subject areas, aggregation, summarization, and predeﬁned queries and reports. Mapping from the operational environment to the data warehouse, which includes source databases and their contents, gateway descriptions, data partitions, data extraction, cleaning, transformation rules and defaults, data refresh and purging rules, and security (user authorization and access control). Data related to system performance, which include indices and proﬁles that improve data access and retrieval performance, in addition to rules for the timing and scheduling of refresh, update, and replication cycles. Business metadata, which include business terms and deﬁnitions, data ownership information, and charging policies. A data warehouse contains different levels of summarization, of which metadata is one. Other types include current detailed data (which are almost always on disk), older detailed data (which are usually on tertiary storage), lightly summarized data, and highly summarized data (which may or may not be physically housed). Metadata play a very different role than other data warehouse data and are important for many reasons. For example, metadata are used as a directory to help the decision support system analyst locate the contents of the data warehouse, and as a guide to the data mapping when data are transformed from the operational environment to the data warehouse environment. Metadata also serve as a guide to the algorithms used for summarization between the current detailed data and the lightly summarized data, and between the lightly summarized data and the highly summarized data. Metadata should be stored and managed persistently (i.e., on disk). 4.2 Data Warehouse Modeling: Data Cube and OLAP Data warehouses and OLAP tools are based on a multidimensional data model. This model views data in the form of a data cube. In this section, you will learn how data cubes model n-dimensional data (Section 4.2.1). In Section 4.2.2, various multidimensional models are shown: star schema, snowﬂake schema, and fact constellation. You will also learn about concept hierarchies (Section 4.2.3) and measures (Section 4.2.4) and how they can be used in basic OLAP operations to allow interactive mining at multiple levels of abstraction. Typical OLAP operations such as drill-down and roll-up are illustrated 136 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing (Section 4.2.5). Finally, the starnet model for querying multidimensional databases is presented (Section 4.2.6). 4.2.1 Data Cube: A Multidimensional Data Model “What is a data cube?” A data cube allows data to be modeled and viewed in multiple dimensions. It is deﬁned by dimensions and facts. In general terms, dimensions are the perspectives or entities with respect to which an organization wants to keep records. For example, AllElectronics may create a sales data warehouse in order to keep records of the store’s sales with respect to the dimen- sions time, item, branch, and location. These dimensions allow the store to keep track of things like monthly sales of items and the branches and locations at which the items were sold. Each dimension may have a table associated with it, called a dimen- sion table, which further describes the dimension. For example, a dimension table for item may contain the attributes item name, brand, and type. Dimension tables can be speciﬁed by users or experts, or automatically generated and adjusted based on data distributions. A multidimensional data model is typically organized around a central theme, such as sales. This theme is represented by a fact table. Facts are numeric measures. Think of them as the quantities by which we want to analyze relationships between dimensions. Examples of facts for a sales data warehouse include dollars sold (sales amount in dol- lars), units sold (number of units sold), and amount budgeted. The fact table contains the names of the facts, or measures, as well as keys to each of the related dimension tables. You will soon get a clearer picture of how this works when we look at multidimensional schemas. Although we usually think of cubes as 3-D geometric structures, in data warehous- ing the data cube is n-dimensional. To gain a better understanding of data cubes and the multidimensional data model, let’s start by looking at a simple 2-D data cube that is, in fact, a table or spreadsheet for sales data from AllElectronics. In particular, we will look at the AllElectronics sales data for items sold per quarter in the city of Van- couver. These data are shown in Table 4.2. In this 2-D representation, the sales for Vancouver are shown with respect to the time dimension (organized in quarters) and the item dimension (organized according to the types of items sold). The fact or measure displayed is dollars sold (in thousands). Now, suppose that we would like to view the sales data with a third dimension. For instance, suppose we would like to view the data according to time and item, as well as location, for the cities Chicago, New York, Toronto, and Vancouver. These 3-D data are shown in Table 4.3. The 3-D data in the table are represented as a series of 2-D tables. Conceptually, we may also represent the same data in the form of a 3-D data cube, as in Figure 4.3. Suppose that we would now like to view our sales data with an additional fourth dimension such as supplier. Viewing things in 4-D becomes tricky. However, we can think of a 4-D cube as being a series of 3-D cubes, as shown in Figure 4.4. If we continue 4.2 Data Warehouse Modeling: Data Cube and OLAP 137 Table 4.2 2-D View of Sales Data for AllElectronics According to time and item location = “Vancouver” item (type) home time (quarter) entertainment computer phone security Q1 605 825 14 400 Q2 680 952 31 512 Q3 812 1023 30 501 Q4 927 1038 38 580 Note: The sales are from branches located in the city of Vancouver. The measure displayed is dollars sold (in thousands). Table 4.3 3-D View of Sales Data for AllElectronics According to time, item, and location location = “Chicago” location = “New York” location = “Toronto” location = “Vancouver” item item item item home home home home time ent. comp. phone sec. ent. comp. phone sec. ent. comp. phone sec. ent. comp. phone sec. Q1 854 882 89 623 1087 968 38 872 818 746 43 591 605 825 14 400 Q2 943 890 64 698 1130 1024 41 925 894 769 52 682 680 952 31 512 Q3 1032 924 59 789 1034 1048 45 1002 940 795 58 728 812 1023 30 501 Q4 1129 992 63 870 1142 1091 54 984 978 864 59 784 927 1038 38 580 Note: The measure displayed is dollars sold (in thousands). in this way, we may display any n-dimensional data as a series of (n −1)-dimensional “cubes.” The data cube is a metaphor for multidimensional data storage. The actual physical storage of such data may differ from its logical representation. The important thing to remember is that data cubes are n-dimensional and do not conﬁne data to 3-D. Tables 4.2 and 4.3 show the data at different degrees of summarization. In the data warehousing research literature, a data cube like those shown in Figures 4.3 and 4.4 is often referred to as a cuboid. Given a set of dimensions, we can generate a cuboid for each of the possible subsets of the given dimensions. The result would form a lattice of cuboids, each showing the data at a different level of summarization, or group-by. The lattice of cuboids is then referred to as a data cube. Figure 4.5 shows a lattice of cuboids forming a data cube for the dimensions time, item, location, and supplier. The cuboid that holds the lowest level of summarization is called the base cuboid. For example, the 4-D cuboid in Figure 4.4 is the base cuboid for the given time, item, location, and supplier dimensions. Figure 4.3 is a 3-D (nonbase) cuboid for time, item, 138 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing 818 1087 854 746 968 882 43 38 89 591 872 623 698 925 789 682 870 1002 728 984 784 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Chicago New York Toronto Vancouver time (quarters) location (cities) home entertainment computer item (types) phone security 605 825 14 400 512 31 952 680 812 1023 30 501 580 38 1038 927 Figure 4.3 A 3-D data cube representation of the data in Table 4.3, according to time, item, and location. The measure displayed is dollars sold (in thousands). 605 825 14 400 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Chicago New York Toronto Vancouver time (quarters) location (cities) home entertainment computer item (types) phone security home entertainment computer item (types) phone security home entertainment computer item (types) phone security supplier=“SUP1” supplier= “SUP2” supplier= “SUP3” Figure 4.4 A 4-D data cube representation of sales data, according to time, item, location, and supplier. The measure displayed is dollars sold (in thousands). For improved readability, only some of the cube values are shown. and location, summarized for all suppliers. The 0-D cuboid, which holds the highest level of summarization, is called the apex cuboid. In our example, this is the total sales, or dollars sold, summarized over all four dimensions. The apex cuboid is typically denoted by all. 4.2 Data Warehouse Modeling: Data Cube and OLAP 139 item, location time, location item, supplier time, supplier time, location, supplier Item location supplier time, item, location, supplier item, location time, location item, supplier time, supplier time, location, supplier item, location, supplier location, supplier time, item, supplier time item location all time, item time, item, location 0-D (apex) cuboid 1-D cuboids 2-D cuboids 3-D cuboids 4-D (base) cuboid Figure 4.5 Lattice of cuboids, making up a 4-D data cube for time, item, location, and supplier. Each cuboid represents a different degree of summarization. 4.2.2 Stars, Snowﬂakes, and Fact Constellations: Schemas for Multidimensional Data Models The entity-relationship data model is commonly used in the design of relational databases, where a database schema consists of a set of entities and the relationships between them. Such a data model is appropriate for online transaction processing. A data warehouse, however, requires a concise, subject-oriented schema that facilitates online data analysis. The most popular data model for a data warehouse is a multidimensional model, which can exist in the form of a star schema, a snowﬂake schema, or a fact constellation schema. Let’s look at each of these. Star schema: The most common modeling paradigm is the star schema, in which the data warehouse contains (1) a large central table (fact table) containing the bulk of the data, with no redundancy, and (2) a set of smaller attendant tables (dimension tables), one for each dimension. The schema graph resembles a starburst, with the dimension tables displayed in a radial pattern around the central fact table. Example 4.1 Star schema. A star schema for AllElectronics sales is shown in Figure 4.6. Sales are con- sidered along four dimensions: time, item, branch, and location. The schema contains a central fact table for sales that contains keys to each of the four dimensions, along 140 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing time Dimension table sales Fact table item Dimension table branch Dimension table location Dimension table time_key day day_of_the_week month quarter year time_key item_key branch_key location_key dollars_sold units_sold item_key item_name brand type supplier_type branch_key branch_name branch_type location_key street city province_or_state country Figure 4.6 Star schema of sales data warehouse. with two measures: dollars sold and units sold. To minimize the size of the fact table, dimension identiﬁers (e.g., time key and item key) are system-generated identiﬁers. Notice that in the star schema, each dimension is represented by only one table, and each table contains a set of attributes. For example, the location dimension table contains the attribute set {location key, street, city, province or state, country}. This constraint may introduce some redundancy. For example, “Urbana” and “Chicago” are both cities in the state of Illinois, USA. Entries for such cities in the location dimension table will create redundancy among the attributes province or state and country; that is, (..., Urbana, IL, USA) and (..., Chicago, IL, USA). Moreover, the attributes within a dimension table may form either a hierarchy (total order) or a lattice (partial order). Snowﬂake schema: The snowﬂake schema is a variant of the star schema model, where some dimension tables are normalized, thereby further splitting the data into additional tables. The resulting schema graph forms a shape similar to a snowﬂake. The major difference between the snowﬂake and star schema models is that the dimension tables of the snowﬂake model may be kept in normalized form to reduce redundancies. Such a table is easy to maintain and saves storage space. However, this space savings is negligible in comparison to the typical magnitude of the fact table. Fur- thermore, the snowﬂake structure can reduce the effectiveness of browsing, since more joins will be needed to execute a query. Consequently, the system performance may be adversely impacted. Hence, although the snowﬂake schema reduces redundancy, it is not as popular as the star schema in data warehouse design. 4.2 Data Warehouse Modeling: Data Cube and OLAP 141 time Dimension table sales Fact table item Dimension table branch Dimension table location Dimension table supplier Dimension table city Dimension table time_key day day_of_week month quarter year time_key item_key branch_key location_key dollars_sold units_sold item_key item_name brand type supplier_key branch_key branch_name branch_type location_key street city_key supplier_key supplier_type city_key city province_or_state country Figure 4.7 Snowﬂake schema of a sales data warehouse. Example 4.2 Snowﬂake schema. A snowﬂake schema for AllElectronics sales is given in Figure 4.7. Here, the sales fact table is identical to that of the star schema in Figure 4.6. The main difference between the two schemas is in the deﬁnition of dimension tables. The single dimension table for item in the star schema is normalized in the snowﬂake schema, resulting in new item and supplier tables. For example, the item dimension table now contains the attributes item key, item name, brand, type, and supplier key, where supplier key is linked to the supplier dimension table, containing supplier key and supplier type information. Similarly, the single dimension table for location in the star schema can be normalized into two new tables: location and city. The city key in the new location table links to the city dimension. Notice that, when desirable, further nor- malization can be performed on province or state and country in the snowﬂake schema shown in Figure 4.7. Fact constellation: Sophisticated applications may require multiple fact tables to share dimension tables. This kind of schema can be viewed as a collection of stars, and hence is called a galaxy schema or a fact constellation. Example 4.3 Fact constellation. A fact constellation schema is shown in Figure 4.8. This schema speciﬁes two fact tables, sales and shipping. The sales table deﬁnition is identical to that of the star schema (Figure 4.6). The shipping table has ﬁve dimensions, or keys—item key, time key, shipper key, from location, and to location—and two measures—dollars cost 142 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing time Dimension table sales Fact table item Dimension table branch Dimension table location Dimension table shipping Fact table shipper Dimension table time_key day day_of_week month quarter year time_key item_key branch_key location_key dollars_sold units_sold item_key item_name brand type supplier_type branch_key branch_name branch_type location_key street city province_or_state country item_key time_key shipper_key from_location to_location dollars_cost units_shipped shipper_key shipper_name location_key shipper_type Figure 4.8 Fact constellation schema of a sales and shipping data warehouse. and units shipped. A fact constellation schema allows dimension tables to be shared between fact tables. For example, the dimensions tables for time, item, and location are shared between the sales and shipping fact tables. In data warehousing, there is a distinction between a data warehouse and a data mart. A data warehouse collects information about subjects that span the entire organization, such as customers, items, sales, assets, and personnel, and thus its scope is enterprise-wide. For data warehouses, the fact constellation schema is commonly used, since it can model multiple, interrelated subjects. A data mart, on the other hand, is a department subset of the data warehouse that focuses on selected subjects, and thus its scope is department- wide. For data marts, the star or snowﬂake schema is commonly used, since both are geared toward modeling single subjects, although the star schema is more popular and efﬁcient. 4.2.3 Dimensions: The Role of Concept Hierarchies A concept hierarchy deﬁnes a sequence of mappings from a set of low-level concepts to higher-level, more general concepts. Consider a concept hierarchy for the dimension location. City values for location include Vancouver, Toronto, New York, and Chicago. Each city, however, can be mapped to the province or state to which it belongs. For example, Vancouver can be mapped to British Columbia, and Chicago to Illinois. The provinces and states can in turn be mapped to the country (e.g., Canada or the United States) to which they belong. These mappings form a concept hierarchy for the 4.2 Data Warehouse Modeling: Data Cube and OLAP 143 dimension location, mapping a set of low-level concepts (i.e., cities) to higher-level, more general concepts (i.e., countries). This concept hierarchy is illustrated in Figure 4.9. Many concept hierarchies are implicit within the database schema. For example, suppose that the dimension location is described by the attributes number, street, city, province or state, zip code, and country. These attributes are related by a total order, forming a concept hierarchy such as “street < city < province or state < country.” This hierarchy is shown in Figure 4.10(a). Alternatively, the attributes of a dimension may Canada all British Columbia Ontario Vancouver Victoria Ottawa Toronto Chicago Urbana Buffalo New York New York Illinois USA location country city province_ or_state all Figure 4.9 A concept hierarchy for location. Due to space limitations, not all of the hierarchy nodes are shown, indicated by ellipses between nodes. country city province_or_state street month week year day quarter (a) (b) Figure 4.10 Hierarchical and lattice structures of attributes in warehouse dimensions: (a) a hierarchy for location and (b) a lattice for time. 144 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing ($0 $1000] ($800 $1000] ($0 … $100] ($100… $200] ($800… $900] ($900… $1000] ($600… $700] ($700… $800] ($200… $300] ($300… $400] ($400… $500] ($500… $600] ($600 $800] ($400 $600] ($200 $400] ($0 $200] Figure 4.11 A concept hierarchy for price. be organized in a partial order, forming a lattice. An example of a partial order for the time dimension based on the attributes day, week, month, quarter, and year is “day < {month < quarter; week} < year.”1 This lattice structure is shown in Figure 4.10(b). A concept hierarchy that is a total or partial order among attributes in a database schema is called a schema hierarchy. Concept hierarchies that are common to many applica- tions (e.g., for time) may be predeﬁned in the data mining system. Data mining systems should provide users with the ﬂexibility to tailor predeﬁned hierarchies according to their particular needs. For example, users may want to deﬁne a ﬁscal year starting on April 1 or an academic year starting on September 1. Concept hierarchies may also be deﬁned by discretizing or grouping values for a given dimension or attribute, resulting in a set-grouping hierarchy. A total or partial order can be deﬁned among groups of values. An example of a set-grouping hierarchy is shown in Figure 4.11 for the dimension price, where an interval ($X ...$Y] denotes the range from $X (exclusive) to $Y (inclusive). There may be more than one concept hierarchy for a given attribute or dimension, based on different user viewpoints. For instance, a user may prefer to organize price by deﬁning ranges for inexpensive, moderately priced, and expensive. Concept hierarchies may be provided manually by system users, domain experts, or knowledge engineers, or may be automatically generated based on statistical analysis of the data distribution. The automatic generation of concept hierarchies is discussed in Chapter 3 as a preprocessing step in preparation for data mining. Concept hierarchies allow data to be handled at varying levels of abstraction, as we will see in Section 4.2.4. 4.2.4 Measures: Their Categorization and Computation “How are measures computed?” To answer this question, we ﬁrst study how measures can be categorized. Note that a multidimensional point in the data cube space can be deﬁned 1Since a week often crosses the boundary of two consecutive months, it is usually not treated as a lower abstraction of month. Instead, it is often treated as a lower abstraction of year, since a year contains approximately 52 weeks. 4.2 Data Warehouse Modeling: Data Cube and OLAP 145 by a set of dimension–value pairs; for example, ⟨time = “Q1”, location = “Vancouver”, item = “computer”⟩. A data cube measure is a numeric function that can be evaluated at each point in the data cube space. A measure value is computed for a given point by aggregating the data corresponding to the respective dimension–value pairs deﬁning the given point. We will look at concrete examples of this shortly. Measures can be organized into three categories—distributive, algebraic, and holi- stic—based on the kind of aggregate functions used. Distributive: An aggregate function is distributive if it can be computed in a distributed manner as follows. Suppose the data are partitioned into n sets. We apply the func- tion to each partition, resulting in n aggregate values. If the result derived by applying the function to the n aggregate values is the same as that derived by applying the func- tion to the entire data set (without partitioning), the function can be computed in a distributed manner. For example, sum() can be computed for a data cube by ﬁrst par- titioning the cube into a set of subcubes, computing sum() for each subcube, and then summing up the counts obtained for each subcube. Hence, sum() is a distributive aggregate function. For the same reason, count(), min(), and max() are distributive aggregate functions. By treating the count value of each nonempty base cell as 1 by default, count() of any cell in a cube can be viewed as the sum of the count values of all of its corresponding child cells in its subcube. Thus, count() is distributive. A measure is distributive if it is obtained by applying a distributive aggregate function. Distributive measures can be computed efﬁciently because of the way the computation can be partitioned. Algebraic: An aggregate function is algebraic if it can be computed by an algebraic func- tion with M arguments (where M is a bounded positive integer), each of which is obtained by applying a distributive aggregate function. For example, avg() (aver- age) can be computed by sum()/count(), where both sum() and count() are distributive aggregate functions. Similarly, it can be shown that min N() and max N() (which ﬁnd the N minimum and N maximum values, respectively, in a given set) and standard deviation() are algebraic aggregate functions. A measure is algebraic if it is obtained by applying an algebraic aggregate function. Holistic: An aggregate function is holistic if there is no constant bound on the stor- age size needed to describe a subaggregate. That is, there does not exist an algebraic function with M arguments (where M is a constant) that characterizes the compu- tation. Common examples of holistic functions include median(), mode(), and rank(). A measure is holistic if it is obtained by applying a holistic aggregate function. Most large data cube applications require efﬁcient computation of distributive and algebraic measures. Many efﬁcient techniques for this exist. In contrast, it is difﬁcult to compute holistic measures efﬁciently. Efﬁcient techniques to approximate the computa- tion of some holistic measures, however, do exist. For example, rather than computing the exact median(), Equation (2.3) of Chapter 2 can be used to estimate the approxi- mate median value for a large data set. In many cases, such techniques are sufﬁcient to overcome the difﬁculties of efﬁcient computation of holistic measures. 146 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing Various methods for computing different measures in data cube construction are discussed in depth in Chapter 5. Notice that most of the current data cube techno- logy conﬁnes the measures of multidimensional databases to numeric data. However, measures can also be applied to other kinds of data, such as spatial, multimedia, or text data. 4.2.5 Typical OLAP Operations “How are concept hierarchies useful in OLAP?” In the multidimensional model, data are organized into multiple dimensions, and each dimension contains multiple levels of abstraction deﬁned by concept hierarchies. This organization provides users with the ﬂexibility to view data from different perspectives. A number of OLAP data cube opera- tions exist to materialize these different views, allowing interactive querying and analysis of the data at hand. Hence, OLAP provides a user-friendly environment for interactive data analysis. Example 4.4 OLAP operations. Let’s look at some typical OLAP operations for multidimensional data. Each of the following operations described is illustrated in Figure 4.12. At the cen- ter of the ﬁgure is a data cube for AllElectronics sales. The cube contains the dimensions location, time, and item, where location is aggregated with respect to city values, time is aggregated with respect to quarters, and item is aggregated with respect to item types. To aid in our explanation, we refer to this cube as the central cube. The measure dis- played is dollars sold (in thousands). (For improved readability, only some of the cubes’ cell values are shown.) The data examined are for the cities Chicago, New York, Toronto, and Vancouver. Roll-up: The roll-up operation (also called the drill-up operation by some vendors) performs aggregation on a data cube, either by climbing up a concept hierarchy for a dimension or by dimension reduction. Figure 4.12 shows the result of a roll-up operation performed on the central cube by climbing up the concept hierarchy for location given in Figure 4.9. This hierarchy was deﬁned as the total order “street < city < province or state < country.” The roll-up operation shown aggregates the data by ascending the location hierarchy from the level of city to the level of country. In other words, rather than grouping the data by city, the resulting cube groups the data by country. When roll-up is performed by dimension reduction, one or more dimensions are removed from the given cube. For example, consider a sales data cube containing only the location and time dimensions. Roll-up may be performed by removing, say, the time dimension, resulting in an aggregation of the total sales by location, rather than by location and by time. Drill-down: Drill-down is the reverse of roll-up. It navigates from less detailed data to more detailed data. Drill-down can be realized by either stepping down a concept hierarchy for a dimension or introducing additional dimensions. Figure 4.12 shows the result of a drill-down operation performed on the central cube by stepping down a 4.2 Data Warehouse Modeling: Data Cube and OLAP 147 home entertainment Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 1000 Canada USA 2000 time (quarters) location (countries) computer item (types) phone security Toronto 395 Q1 Q2 605 Vancouver time (quarters) location (cities) home entertainment computer item (types) January February March April May June July August September October November December Chicago New York Toronto Vancouver time (months) location (cities) home entertainment computer item (types) phone security 150 100 150 605 825 14 400 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Chicago New York Toronto Vancouver time (quarters) location (cities) home entertainment computer item (types) phone security 440 395 1560 dice for (location = “Toronto” or “Vancouver”) and (time = “Q1” or “Q2”) and (item = “home entertainment” or “computer”) roll-up on location (from cities to countries) slice for time=“Q1” Chicago New York Toronto Vancouver home entertainment computer item (types) phone security location (cities) 605 825 14 400 home entertainment computer phone security 605 825 14 400 Chicago New York location (cities) item (types) Toronto Vancouver pivot drill-down on time (from quarters to months) Figure 4.12 Examples of typical OLAP operations on multidimensional data. 148 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing concept hierarchy for time deﬁned as “day < month < quarter < year.” Drill-down occurs by descending the time hierarchy from the level of quarter to the more detailed level of month. The resulting data cube details the total sales per month rather than summarizing them by quarter. Because a drill-down adds more detail to the given data, it can also be per- formed by adding new dimensions to a cube. For example, a drill-down on the central cube of Figure 4.12 can occur by introducing an additional dimension, such as customer group. Slice and dice: The slice operation performs a selection on one dimension of the given cube, resulting in a subcube. Figure 4.12 shows a slice operation where the sales data are selected from the central cube for the dimension time using the criterion time = “Q1.” The dice operation deﬁnes a subcube by performing a selection on two or more dimensions. Figure 4.12 shows a dice operation on the central cube based on the following selection criteria that involve three dimensions: (location = “Toronto” or “Vancouver”) and (time = “Q1” or “Q2”) and (item = “home entertainment” or “computer”). Pivot (rotate): Pivot (also called rotate) is a visualization operation that rotates the data axes in view to provide an alternative data presentation. Figure 4.12 shows a pivot operation where the item and location axes in a 2-D slice are rotated. Other examples include rotating the axes in a 3-D cube, or transforming a 3-D cube into a series of 2-D planes. Other OLAP operations: Some OLAP systems offer additional drilling operations. For example, drill-across executes queries involving (i.e., across) more than one fact table. The drill-through operation uses relational SQL facilities to drill through the bottom level of a data cube down to its back-end relational tables. Other OLAP operations may include ranking the top N or bottom N items in lists, as well as computing moving averages, growth rates, interests, internal return rates, depreciation, currency conversions, and statistical functions. OLAP offers analytical modeling capabilities, including a calculation engine for deriving ratios, variance, and so on, and for computing measures across multiple dimen- sions. It can generate summarizations, aggregations, and hierarchies at each granularity level and at every dimension intersection. OLAP also supports functional models for forecasting, trend analysis, and statistical analysis. In this context, an OLAP engine is a powerful data analysis tool. OLAP Systems versus Statistical Databases Many OLAP systems’ characteristics (e.g., the use of a multidimensional data model and concept hierarchies, the association of measures with dimensions, and the notions of roll-up and drill-down) also exist in earlier work on statistical databases (SDBs). A statistical database is a database system that is designed to support statistical applica- tions. Similarities between the two types of systems are rarely discussed, mainly due to differences in terminology and application domains. 4.2 Data Warehouse Modeling: Data Cube and OLAP 149 OLAP and SDB systems, however, have distinguishing differences. While SDBs tend to focus on socioeconomic applications, OLAP has been targeted for business appli- cations. Privacy issues regarding concept hierarchies are a major concern for SDBs. For example, given summarized socioeconomic data, it is controversial to allow users to view the corresponding low-level data. Finally, unlike SDBs, OLAP systems are designed for efﬁciently handling huge amounts of data. 4.2.6 A Starnet Query Model for Querying Multidimensional Databases The querying of multidimensional databases can be based on a starnet model, which consists of radial lines emanating from a central point, where each line represents a concept hierarchy for a dimension. Each abstraction level in the hierarchy is called a footprint. These represent the granularities available for use by OLAP operations such as drill-down and roll-up. Example 4.5 Starnet. A starnet query model for the AllElectronics data warehouse is shown in Figure 4.13. This starnet consists of four radial lines, representing concept hierarchies for the dimensions location, customer, item, and time, respectively. Each line consists of footprints representing abstraction levels of the dimension. For example, the time line has four footprints: “day,” “month,” “quarter,” and “year.” A concept hierarchy may involve a single attribute (e.g., date for the time hierarchy) or several attributes (e.g., the concept hierarchy for location involves the attributes street, city, province or state, and country). In order to examine the item sales at AllElectronics, users can roll up along the continent country province_or_state city street name brand category type name category group year quarter month day time item location customer Figure 4.13 A starnet model of business queries. 150 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing time dimension from month to quarter, or, say, drill down along the location dimension from country to city. Concept hierarchies can be used to generalize data by replacing low-level values (such as “day” for the time dimension) by higher-level abstractions (such as “year”), or to specialize data by replacing higher-level abstractions with lower-level values. 4.3 Data Warehouse Design and Usage “What goes into a data warehouse design? How are data warehouses used? How do data warehousing and OLAP relate to data mining?” This section tackles these questions. We study the design and usage of data warehousing for information processing, analyti- cal processing, and data mining. We begin by presenting a business analysis framework for data warehouse design (Section 4.3.1). Section 4.3.2 looks at the design process, while Section 4.3.3 studies data warehouse usage. Finally, Section 4.3.4 describes multi- dimensional data mining, a powerful paradigm that integrates OLAP with data mining technology. 4.3.1 A Business Analysis Framework for Data Warehouse Design “What can business analysts gain from having a data warehouse?” First, having a