lower-dimensional space can be found, then conventional outlier detection methods can be applied. To reduce dimensionality, general feature selection and extraction methods may be used or extended for outlier detection. For example, principal components analysis (PCA) can be used to extract a lower-dimensional space. Heuristically, the principal components with low variance are preferred because, on such dimensions, normal objects are likely close to each other and outliers often deviate from the majority. By extending conventional outlier detection methods, we can reuse much of the expe- rience gained from research in the ﬁeld. These new methods, however, are limited. First, they cannot detect outliers with respect to subspaces and thus have limited interpretabil- ity. Second, dimensionality reduction is feasible only if there exists a lower-dimensional space where normal objects and outliers are well separated. This assumption may not hold true. 12.8.2 Finding Outliers in Subspaces Another approach for outlier detection in high-dimensional data is to search for outliers in various subspaces. A unique advantage is that, if an object is found to be an outlier in a subspace of much lower dimensionality, the subspace provides critical information for interpreting why and to what extent the object is an outlier. This insight is highly valuable in applications with high-dimensional data due to the overwhelming number of dimensions. Example 12.24 Outliers in subspaces. As a customer-relationship manager at AllElectronics, you are interested in ﬁnding outlier customers. AllElectronics maintains an extensive customer information database, which contains many attributes and the transaction history of customers. The database is high dimensional. Suppose you ﬁnd that a customer, Alice, is an outlier in a lower-dimensional sub- space that contains the dimensions average transaction amount and purchase frequency, such that her average transaction amount is substantially larger than the majority of the customers, and her purchase frequency is dramatically lower. The subspace itself speaks for why and to what extent Alice is an outlier. Using this information, you strate- gically decide to approach Alice by suggesting options that could improve her purchase frequency at AllElectronics. 12.8 Outlier Detection in High-Dimensional Data 579 “How can we detect outliers in subspaces?” We use a grid-based subspace outlier detection method to illustrate. The major ideas are as follows. We consider projections of the data onto various subspaces. If, in a subspace, we ﬁnd an area that has a density that is much lower than average, then the area may contain outliers. To ﬁnd such projections, we ﬁrst discretize the data into a grid in an equal-depth way. That is, each dimension is partitioned into φ equal-depth ranges, where each range contains a fraction, f , of the objects  f = 1 φ  . Equal-depth partitioning is used because data along different dimen- sions may have different localities. An equal-width partitioning of the space may not be able to reﬂect such differences in locality. Next, we search for regions deﬁned by ranges in subspaces that are signiﬁ- cantly sparse. To quantify what we mean by “signiﬁcantly sparse,” let’s consider a k-dimensional cube formed by k ranges on k dimensions. Suppose the data set con- tains n objects. If the objects are independently distributed, the expected number of objects falling into a k-dimensional region is  1 φ k n = f kn. The standard deviation of the number of points in a k-dimensional region is p f k(1 −f k)n. Suppose a speciﬁc k-dimensional cube C has n(C) objects. We can deﬁne the sparsity coefﬁcient of C as S(C) = n(C) −f kn p f k(1 −f k)n . (12.22) If S(C) < 0, then C contains fewer objects than expected. The smaller the value of S(C) (i.e., the more negative), the sparser C is and the more likely the objects in C are outliers in the subspace. By assuming S(C) follows a normal distribution, we can use normal distribution tables to determine the probabilistic signiﬁcance level for an object that deviates dra- matically from the average for an a priori assumption of the data following a uniform distribution. In general, the assumption of uniform distribution does not hold. How- ever, the sparsity coefﬁcient still provides an intuitive measure of the “outlier-ness” of a region. To ﬁnd cubes of signiﬁcantly small sparsity coefﬁcient values, a brute-force approach is to search every cube in every possible subspace. The cost of this, however, is immediately exponential. An evolutionary search can be conducted, which improves efﬁ- ciency at the expense of accuracy. For details, please refer to the bibliographic notes (Section 12.11). The objects contained by cubes of very small sparsity coefﬁcient values are output as outliers. In summary, searching for outliers in subspaces is advantageous in that the outliers found tend to be better understood, owing to the context provided by the subspaces. Challenges include making the search efﬁcient and scalable. 12.8.3 Modeling High-Dimensional Outliers An alternative approach for outlier detection methods in high-dimensional data tries to develop new models for high-dimensional outliers directly. Such models typically avoid 580 Chapter 12 Outlier Detection proximity measures and instead adopt new heuristics to detect outliers, which do not deteriorate in high-dimensional data. Let’s examine angle-based outlier detection (ABOD) as an example. Example 12.25 Angle-based outliers. Figure 12.15 contains a set of points forming a cluster, with the exception of c, which is an outlier. For each point o, we examine the angle ∠xoy for every pair of points x, y such that x ̸= o, y ̸= o. The ﬁgure shows angle ∠dae as an example. Note that for a point in the center of a cluster (e.g., a), the angles formed as such differ widely. For a point that is at the border of a cluster (e.g., b), the angle variation is smaller. For a point that is an outlier (e.g., c), the angle variable is substantially smaller. This observation suggests that we can use the variance of angles for a point to determine whether a point is an outlier. We can combine angles and distance to model outliers. Mathematically, for each point o, we use the distance-weighted angle variance as the outlier score. That is, given a set of points, D, for a point, o ∈D, we deﬁne the angle-based outlier factor (ABOF) as ABOF(o) = VARx,y∈D,x̸=o,y̸=o ⟨−→ ox,−→ oy⟩ dist(o,x)2dist(o,y)2 , (12.23) where ⟨,⟩is the scalar product operator, and dist(,) is a norm distance. Clearly, the farther away a point is from clusters and the smaller the variance of the angles of a point, the smaller the ABOF. The ABOD computes the ABOF for each point, and outputs a list of the points in the data set in ABOF-ascending order. Computing the exact ABOF for every point in a database is costly, requiring a time complexity of O(n3), where n is the number of points in the database. Obviously, this exact algorithm does not scale up for large data sets. Approximation methods have been developed to speed up the computation. The angle-based outlier detection idea has been generalized to handle arbitrary data types. For additional details, see the bibliographic notes (Section 12.11). Developing native models for high-dimensional outliers can lead to effective meth- ods. However, ﬁnding good heuristics for detecting high-dimensional outliers is dif- ﬁcult. Efﬁciency and scalability on large and high-dimensional data sets are major challenges. d a c b e Figure 12.15 Angle-based outliers. 12.9 Summary 581 12.9 Summary Assume that a given statistical process is used to generate a set of data objects. An outlier is a data object that deviates signiﬁcantly from the rest of the objects, as if it were generated by a different mechanism. Types of outliers include global outliers, contextual outliers, and collective outliers. An object may be more than one type of outlier. Global outliers are the simplest form of outlier and the easiest to detect. A contextual outlier deviates signiﬁcantly with respect to a speciﬁc context of the object (e.g., a Toronto temperature value of 28◦C is an outlier if it occurs in the context of winter). A subset of data objects forms a collective outlier if the objects as a whole deviate signiﬁcantly from the entire data set, even though the individual data objects may not be outliers. Collective outlier detection requires background information to model the relationships among objects to ﬁnd outlier groups. Challenges in outlier detection include ﬁnding appropriate data models, the depen- dence of outlier detection systems on the application involved, ﬁnding ways to distinguish outliers from noise, and providing justiﬁcation for identifying outliers as such. Outlier detection methods can be categorized according to whether the sample of data for analysis is given with expert-provided labels that can be used to build an outlier detection model. In this case, the detection methods are supervised, semi-supervised, or unsupervised. Alternatively, outlier detection methods may be organized according to their assumptions regarding normal objects versus out- liers. This categorization includes statistical methods, proximity-based methods, and clustering-based methods. Statistical outlier detection methods (or model-based methods) assume that the normal data objects follow a statistical model, where data not following the model are considered outliers. Such methods may be parametric (they assume that the data are generated by a parametric distribution) or nonparametric (they learn a model for the data, rather than assuming one a priori). Parametric methods for multivariate data may employ the Mahalanobis distance, the χ2-statistic, or a mixture of mul- tiple parametric models. Histograms and kernel density estimation are examples of nonparametric methods. Proximity-based outlier detection methods assume that an object is an outlier if the proximity of the object to its nearest neighbors signiﬁcantly deviates from the proximity of most of the other objects to their neighbors in the same data set. Distance-based outlier detection methods consult the neighborhood of an object, deﬁned by a given radius. An object is an outlier if its neighborhood does not have enough other points. In density-based outlier detection methods, an object is an outlier if its density is relatively much lower than that of its neighbors. 582 Chapter 12 Outlier Detection Clustering-based outlier detection methods assume that the normal data objects belong to large and dense clusters, whereas outliers belong to small or sparse clusters, or do not belong to any clusters. Classiﬁcation-based outlier detection methods often use a one-class model. That is, a classiﬁer is built to describe only the normal class. Any samples that do not belong to the normal class are regarded as outliers. Contextual outlier detection and collective outlier detection explore structures in the data. In contextual outlier detection, the structures are deﬁned as contexts using contextual attributes. In collective outlier detection, the structures are implicit and are explored as part of the mining process. To detect such outliers, one approach transforms the problem into one of conventional outlier detection. Another approach models the structures directly. Outlier detection methods for high-dimensional data can be divided into three main approaches. These include extending conventional outlier detection, ﬁnding outliers in subspaces, and modeling high-dimensional outliers. 12.10 Exercises 12.1 Give an application example where global outliers, contextual outliers, and collective outliers are all interesting. What are the attributes, and what are the contextual and behavioral attributes? How is the relationship among objects modeled in collective outlier detection? 12.2 Give an application example of where the border between normal objects and outliers is often unclear, so that the degree to which an object is an outlier has to be well estimated. 12.3 Adapt a simple semi-supervised method for outlier detection. Discuss the scenario where you have (a) only some labeled examples of normal objects, and (b) only some labeled examples of outliers. 12.4 Using an equal-depth histogram, design a way to assign an object an outlier score. 12.5 Consider the nested loop approach to mining distance-based outliers (Figure 12.6). Sup- pose the objects in a data set are arranged randomly, that is, each object has the same probability to appear in a position. Show that when the number of outlier objects is small with respect to the total number of objects in the whole data set, the expected number of distance calculations is linear to the number of objects. 12.6 In the density-based outlier detection method of Section 12.4.3, the deﬁnition of local reachability density has a potential problem: lrdk(o) = ∞may occur. Explain why this may occur and propose a ﬁx to the issue. 12.7 Because clusters may form a hierarchy, outliers may belong to different granularity levels. Propose a clustering-based outlier detection method that can ﬁnd outliers at different levels. 12.11 Bibliographic Notes 583 12.8 In outlier detection by semi-supervised learning, what is the advantage of using objects without labels in the training data set? 12.9 To understand why angle-based outlier detection is a heuristic method, give an example where it does not work well. Can you come up with a method to overcome this issue? 12.11 Bibliographic Notes Hawkins [Haw80] deﬁned outliers from a statistics angle. For surveys or tutorials on the subject of outlier and anomaly detection, see Chandola, Banerjee, and Kumar [CBK09]; Hodge and Austin [HA04]; Agyemang, Barker, and Alhajj [ABA06]; Markou and Singh [MS03a, MS03b]; Patcha and Park [PP07]; Beckman and Cook [BC83]; Ben- Gal [B-G05]; and Bakar, Mohemad, Ahmad, and Deris [BMAD06]. Song, Wu, Jermaine, et al. [SWJR-07] proposed the notion of conditional anomaly and contextual outlier detection. Fujimaki, Yairi, and Machida [FYM05] presented an example of semi-supervised out- lier detection using a set of labeled “normal” objects. For an example of semi-supervised outlier detection using labeled outliers, see Dasgupta and Majumdar [DM02]. Shewhart [She31] assumed that most objects follow a Gaussian distribution and used 3σ as the threshold for identifying outliers, where σ is the standard devia- tion. Boxplots are used to detect and visualize outliers in various applications such as medical data (Horn, Feng, Li, and Pesce [HFLP01]). Grubb’s test was described by Grubbs [Gru69], Stefansky [Ste72], and Anscombe and Guttman [AG60]. Laurikkala, Juhola, and Kentala [LJK00] and Aggarwal and Yu [AY01] extended Grubb’s test to detect multivariate outliers. Use of the χ2-statistic to detect multivariate outliers was studied by Ye and Chen [YC01]. Agarwal [Aga06] used Gaussian mixture models to capture “normal data.” Abraham and Box [AB79] assumed that outliers are generated by a normal distribution with a substantially larger variance. Eskin [Esk00] used the EM algorithm to learn mixture models for normal data and outliers. Histogram-based outlier detection methods are popular in the application domain of intrusion detection (Eskin [Esk00] and Eskin, Arnold, Prerau, et al. [EAP+02]) and fault detection (Fawcett and Provost [FP97]). The notion of distance-based outliers was developed by Knorr and Ng [KN97]. The index-based, nested loop–based, and grid-based approaches were explored (Knorr and Ng [KN98] and Knorr, Ng, and Tucakov [KNT00]) to speed up distance-based out- lier detection. Bay and Schwabacher [BS03] and Jin, Tung, and Han [JTH01] pointed out that the CPU runtime of the nested loop method is often scalable with respect to database size. Tao, Xiao, and Zhou [TXZ06] presented an algorithm that ﬁnds all distance-based outliers by scanning the database three times with ﬁxed main memory. For larger memory size, they proposed a method that uses only one or two scans. The notion of density-based outliers was ﬁrst developed by Breunig, Kriegel, Ng, and Sander [BKNS00]. Various methods proposed with the theme of density-based 584 Chapter 12 Outlier Detection outlier detection include Jin, Tung, and Han [JTH01]; Jin, Tung, Han, and Wang [JTHW06]; and Papadimitriou, Kitagawa, Gibbons, et al. [PKG-F03]. The variations differ in how they estimate density. The bootstrap method discussed in Example 12.17 was developed by Barbara, Li, Couto, et al. [BLC+03]. The FindCBOLF algorithm was given by He, Xu, and Deng [HXD03]. For the use of ﬁxed-width clustering in outlier detection meth- ods, see Eskin, Arnold, and Prerau, et al. [EAP+02]; Mahoney and Chan [MC03]; and He, Xu, and Deng [HXD03]. Barbara, Wu, and Jajodia [BWJ01] used multiclass classiﬁcation in network intrusion detection. Song, Wu, Jermaine, et al. [SWJR07] and Fawcet and Provost [FP97] presented a method to reduce the problem of contextual outlier detection to one of conventional outlier detection. Yi, Sidiropoulos, Johnson, Jagadish, et al. [YSJJ+00] used regres- sion techniques to detect contextual outliers in co-evolving sequences. The idea in Example 12.22 for collective outlier detection on graph data is based on Noble and Cook [NC03]. The HilOut algorithm was proposed by Angiulli and Pizzuti [AP05]. Aggarwal and Yu [AY01] developed the sparsity coefﬁcient–based subspace outlier detection method. Kriegel, Schubert, and Zimek [KSZ08] proposed angle-based outlier detection. 13 Data Mining Trends and Research Frontiers As a young research ﬁeld, data mining has made signiﬁcant progress and covered a broad spec- trum of applications since the 1980s. Today, data mining is used in a vast array of areas. Numerous commercial data mining systems and services are available. Many chal- lenges, however, still remain. In this ﬁnal chapter, we introduce the mining of complex data types as a prelude to further in-depth study readers may choose to do. In addi- tion, we focus on trends and research frontiers in data mining. Section 13.1 presents an overview of methodologies for mining complex data types, which extend the concepts and tasks introduced in this book. Such mining includes mining time-series, sequential patterns, and biological sequences; graphs and networks; spatiotemporal data, including geospatial data, moving-object data, and cyber-physical system data; multimedia data; text data; web data; and data streams. Section 13.2 brieﬂy introduces other approaches to data mining, including statistical methods, theoretical foundations, and visual and audio data mining. In Section 13.3, you will learn more about data mining applications in business and in science, including the ﬁnancial retail, and telecommunication industries, science and engineering, and recommender systems. The social impacts of data mining are discussed in Section 13.4, including ubiquitous and invisible data mining, and privacy-preserving data mining. Finally, in Section 13.5 we speculate on current and expected data mining trends that arise in response to new challenges in the ﬁeld. 13.1 Mining Complex Data Types In this section, we outline the major developments and research efforts in mining com- plex data types. Complex data types are summarized in Figure 13.1. Section 13.1.1 covers mining sequence data such as time-series, symbolic sequences, and biological sequences. Section 13.1.2 discusses mining graphs and social and information networks. Section 13.1.3 addresses mining other kinds of data, including spatial data, spatiotem- poral data, moving-object data, cyber-physical system data, multimedia data, text data, c⃝2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques 585 586 Chapter 13 Data Mining Trends and Research Frontiers C o m p l e x T y p e s o f D a t a Sequence Data Graphs and Network Mining Other Kinds of Data Time-series data (e.g., stock market data) Symbolic sequences (e.g., customer shopping sequences, web click streams) Biological sequences (e.g., DNA and protein sequences) Homogeneous (nodes/links are of same type) or heterogeneous (nodes/links are of different types) Examples: Graphs and social, and information networks, etc. Spatial data Spatiotemporal data Cyber-physical system data Multimedia data Text data Web data Data streams Figure 13.1 Complex data types for mining. web data, and data streams. Due to the broad scope of these themes, this section presents only a high-level overview; these topics are not discussed in-depth in this book. 13.1.1 Mining Sequence Data: Time-Series, Symbolic Sequences, and Biological Sequences A sequence is an ordered list of events. Sequences may be categorized into three groups, based on the characteristics of the events they describe: (1) time-series data, (2) symbolic sequence data, and (3) biological sequences. Let’s consider each type. In time-series data, sequence data consist of long sequences of numeric data, recorded at equal time intervals (e.g., per minute, per hour, or per day). Time-series data can be generated by many natural and economic processes such as stock markets, and scientiﬁc, medical, or natural observations. Symbolic sequence data consist of long sequences of event or nominal data, which typically are not observed at equal time intervals. For many such sequences, gaps (i.e., lapses between recorded events) do not matter much. Examples include customer shop- ping sequences and web click streams, as well as sequences of events in science and engineering and in natural and social developments. Biological sequences include DNA and protein sequences. Such sequences are typi- cally very long, and carry important, complicated, but hidden semantic meaning. Here, gaps are usually important. Let’s look into data mining for each of these sequence data types. 13.1 Mining Complex Data Types 587 Similarity Search in Time-Series Data A time-series data set consists of sequences of numeric values obtained over repeated measurements of time. The values are typically measured at equal time intervals (e.g., every minute, hour, or day). Time-series databases are popular in many applications such as stock market analysis, economic and sales forecasting, budgetary analysis, util- ity studies, inventory studies, yield projections, workload projections, and process and quality control. They are also useful for studying natural phenomena (e.g., atmosphere, temperature, wind, earthquake), scientiﬁc and engineering experiments, and medical treatments. Unlike normal database queries, which ﬁnd data that match a given query exactly, a similarity search ﬁnds data sequences that differ only slightly from the given query sequence. Many time-series similarity queries require subsequence matching, that is, ﬁnding a set of sequences that contain subsequences that are similar to a given query sequence. For similarity search, it is often necessary to ﬁrst perform data or dimensionality reduction and transformation of time-series data. Typical dimensionality reduction tech- niques include (1) the discrete Fourier transform (DFT), (2) discrete wavelet transforms (DWT), and (3) singular value decomposition (SVD) based on principle components anal- ysis (PCA). Because we touched on these concepts in Chapter 3, and because a thorough explanation is beyond the scope of this book, we will not go into great detail here. With such techniques, the data or signal is mapped to a signal in a transformed space. A small subset of the “strongest” transformed coefﬁcients are saved as features. These features form a feature space, which is a projection of the transformed space. Indices can be constructed on the original or transformed time-series data to speed up a search. For a query-based similarity search, techniques include normalization transformation, atomic matching (i.e., ﬁnding pairs of gap-free windows of a small length that are similar), window stitching (i.e., stitching similar windows to form pairs of large similar subsequences, allowing gaps between atomic matches), and subse- quence ordering (i.e., linearly ordering the subsequence matches to determine whether enough similar pieces exist). Numerous software packages exist for a similarity search in time-series data. Recently, researchers have proposed transforming time-series data into piecewise aggregate approximations so that the data can be viewed as a sequence of symbolic rep- resentations. The problem of similarity search is then transformed into one of matching subsequences in symbolic sequence data. We can identify motifs (i.e., frequently occur- ring sequential patterns) and build index or hashing mechanisms for an efﬁcient search based on such motifs. Experiments show this approach is fast and simple, and has comparable search quality to that of DFT, DWT, and other dimensionality reduction methods. Regression and Trend Analysis in Time-Series Data Regression analysis of time-series data has been studied substantially in the ﬁelds of statistics and signal analysis. However, one may often need to go beyond pure regression 588 Chapter 13 Data Mining Trends and Research Frontiers Price Time AllElectronics stock 10-day moving average Figure 13.2 Time-series data for the stock price of AllElectronics over time. The trend is shown with a dashed curve, calculated by a moving average. analysis and perform trend analysis for many practical applications. Trend analysis builds an integrated model using the following four major components or movements to characterize time-series data: 1. Trend or long-term movements: These indicate the general direction in which a time-series graph is moving over time, for example, using weighted moving average and the least squares methods to ﬁnd trend curves such as the dashed curve indicated in Figure 13.2. 2. Cyclic movements: These are the long-term oscillations about a trend line or curve. 3. Seasonal variations: These are nearly identical patterns that a time series appears to follow during corresponding seasons of successive years such as holiday shopping seasons. For effective trend analysis, the data often need to be “deseasonalized” based on a seasonal index computed by autocorrelation. 4. Random movements: These characterize sporadic changes due to chance events such as labor disputes or announced personnel changes within companies. Trend analysis can also be used for time-series forecasting, that is, ﬁnding a math- ematical function that will approximately generate the historic patterns in a time series, and using it to make long-term or short-term predictions of future values. ARIMA (auto-regressive integrated moving average), long-memory time-series modeling, and autoregression are popular methods for such analysis. Sequential Pattern Mining in Symbolic Sequences A symbolic sequence consists of an ordered set of elements or events, recorded with or without a concrete notion of time. There are many applications involving data of 13.1 Mining Complex Data Types 589 symbolic sequences such as customer shopping sequences, web click streams, program execution sequences, biological sequences, and sequences of events in science and engineering and in natural and social developments. Because biological sequences carry very complicated semantic meaning and pose many challenging research issues, most investigations are conducted in the ﬁeld of bioinformatics. Sequential pattern mining has focused extensively on mining symbolic sequences. A sequential pattern is a frequent subsequence existing in a single sequence or a set of sequences. A sequence α = ⟨a1a2 ···an⟩is a subsequence of another sequence β = ⟨b1b2 ···bm⟩if there exist integers 1 ≤j1 < j2 < ··· < jn ≤m such that a1 ⊆bj1, a2 ⊆bj2,...,an ⊆bjn. For example, if α = ⟨{ab},d⟩and β = ⟨{abc},{be},{de},a⟩, where a,b,c,d, and e are items, then α is a subsequence of β. Mining of sequential patterns consists of mining the set of subsequences that are frequent in one sequence or a set of sequences. Many scalable algorithms have been developed as a result of extensive stud- ies in this area. Alternatively, we can mine only the set of closed sequential patterns, where a sequential pattern s is closed if there exists no sequential pattern s′, where s is a proper subsequence of s′, and s′ has the same (frequency) support as s. Similar to its frequent pattern mining counterpart, there are also studies on efﬁcient mining of multidimensional, multilevel sequential patterns. As with constraint-based frequent pattern mining, user-speciﬁed constraints can be used to reduce the search space in sequential pattern mining and derive only the patterns that are of interest to the user. This is referred to as constraint-based sequential pattern mining. Moreover, we may relax constraints or enforce additional constraints on the problem of sequential pattern mining to derive different kinds of patterns from sequence data. For example, we can enforce gap constraints so that the patterns derived con- tain only consecutive subsequences or subsequences with very small gaps. Alternatively, we may derive periodic sequential patterns by folding events into proper-size windows and ﬁnding recurring subsequences in these windows. Another approach derives partial order patterns by relaxing the requirement of strict sequential ordering in the mining of subsequence patterns. Besides mining partial order patterns, sequential pattern mining methodology can also be extended to mining trees, lattices, episodes, and some other ordered patterns. Sequence Classiﬁcation Most classiﬁcation methods perform model construction based on feature vectors. However, sequences do not have explicit features. Even with sophisticated feature selec- tion techniques, the dimensionality of potential features can still be very high and the sequential nature of features is difﬁcult to capture. This makes sequence classiﬁcation a challenging task. Sequence classiﬁcation methods can be organized into three categories: (1) feature- based classiﬁcation, which transforms a sequence into a feature vector and then applies conventional classiﬁcation methods; (2) sequence distance–based classiﬁcation, where the distance function that measures the similarity between sequences determines the 590 Chapter 13 Data Mining Trends and Research Frontiers quality of the classiﬁcation signiﬁcantly; and (3) model-based classiﬁcation such as using hidden Markov model (HMM) or other statistical models to classify sequences. For time-series or other numeric-valued data, the feature selection techniques for symbolic sequences cannot be easily applied to time-series data without discretization. However, discretization can cause information loss. A recently proposed time-series shapelets method uses the time-series subsequences that can maximally represent a class as the features. It achieves quality classiﬁcation results. Alignment of Biological Sequences Biological sequences generally refer to sequences of nucleotides or amino acids. Biolog- ical sequence analysis compares, aligns, indexes, and analyzes biological sequences and thus plays a crucial role in bioinformatics and modern biology. Sequence alignment is based on the fact that all living organisms are related by evo- lution. This implies that the nucleotide (DNA, RNA) and protein sequences of species that are closer to each other in evolution should exhibit more similarities. An alignment is the process of lining up sequences to achieve a maximal identity level, which also expresses the degree of similarity between sequences. Two sequences are homologous if they share a common ancestor. The degree of similarity obtained by sequence align- ment can be useful in determining the possibility of homology between two sequences. Such an alignment also helps determine the relative positions of multiple species in an evolution tree, which is called a phylogenetic tree. The problem of alignment of biological sequences can be described as follows: Given two or more input biological sequences, identify similar sequences with long conserved sub- sequences. If the number of sequences to be aligned is exactly two, the problem is known as pairwise sequence alignment; otherwise, it is multiple sequence alignment. The sequences to be compared and aligned can be either nucleotides (DNA/RNA) or amino acids (proteins). For nucleotides, two symbols align if they are identical. However, for amino acids, two symbols align if they are identical, or if one can be derived from the other by substitutions that are likely to occur in nature. There are two kinds of align- ments: local alignments and global alignments. The former means that only portions of the sequences are aligned, whereas the latter requires alignment over the entire length of the sequences. For either nucleotides or amino acids, insertions, deletions, and substitutions occur in nature with different probabilities. Substitution matrices are used to represent the probabilities of substitutions of nucleotides or amino acids and probabilities of inser- tions and deletions. Usually, we use the gap character, −, to indicate positions where it is preferable not to align two symbols. To evaluate the quality of alignments, a scor- ing mechanism is typically deﬁned, which usually counts identical or similar symbols as positive scores and gaps as negative ones. The algebraic sum of the scores is taken as the alignment measure. The goal of alignment is to achieve the maximal score among all the possible alignments. However, it is very expensive (more exactly, an NP-hard problem) to ﬁnd optimal alignment. Therefore, various heuristic methods have been developed to ﬁnd suboptimal alignments. 13.1 Mining Complex Data Types 591 The dynamic programming approach is commonly used for sequence alignments. Among many available analysis packages, BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool) is one of the most popular tools in biosequence analysis. Hidden Markov Model for Biological Sequence Analysis Given a biological sequence, biologists would like to analyze what that sequence repre- sents. To represent the structure or statistical regularities of sequence classes, biologists construct various probabilistic models such as Markov chains and hidden Markov models. In both models, the probability of a state depends only on that of the previous state; therefore, they are particularly useful for the analysis of biological sequence data. The most common methods for constructing hidden Markov models are the forward algorithm, the Viterbi algorithm, and the Baum-Welch algorithm. Given a sequence of symbols, x, the forward algorithm ﬁnds the probability of obtaining x in the model; the Viterbi algorithm ﬁnds the most probable path (corresponding to x) through the model, whereas the Baum-Welch algorithm learns or adjusts the model parameters so as to best explain a set of training sequences. 13.1.2 Mining Graphs and Networks Graphs represents a more general class of structures than sets, sequences, lattices, and trees. There is a broad range of graph applications on the Web and in social networks, information networks, biological networks, bioinformatics, chemical informatics, com- puter vision, and multimedia and text retrieval. Hence, graph and network mining have become increasingly important and heavily researched. We overview the follow- ing major themes: (1) graph pattern mining; (2) statistical modeling of networks; (3) data cleaning, integration, and validation by network analysis; (4) clustering and classiﬁcation of graphs and homogeneous networks; (5) clustering, ranking, and classiﬁ- cation of heterogeneous networks; (6) role discovery and link prediction in information networks; (7) similarity search and OLAP in information networks; and (8) evolution of information networks. Graph Pattern Mining Graph pattern mining is the mining of frequent subgraphs (also called (sub)graph pat- terns) in one or a set of graphs. Methods for mining graph patterns can be categorized into Apriori-based and pattern growth–based approaches. Alternatively, we can mine the set of closed graphs where a graph g is closed if there exists no proper supergraph g′ that carries the same support count as g. Moreover, there are many variant graph patterns, including approximate frequent graphs, coherent graphs, and dense graphs. User-speciﬁed constraints can be pushed deep into the graph pattern mining process to improve mining efﬁciency. Graph pattern mining has many interesting applications. For example, it can be used to generate compact and effective graph index structures based on the concept of 592 Chapter 13 Data Mining Trends and Research Frontiers frequent and discriminative graph patterns. Approximate structure similarity search can be achieved by exploring graph index structures and multiple graph features. More- over, classiﬁcation of graphs can also be performed effectively using frequent and discriminative subgraphs as features. Statistical Modeling of Networks A network consists of a set of nodes, each corresponding to an object associated with a set of properties, and a set of edges (or links) connecting those nodes, representing relation- ships between objects. A network is homogeneous if all the nodes and links are of the same type, such as a friend network, a coauthor network, or a web page network. A net- work is heterogeneous if the nodes and links are of different types, such as publication networks (linking together authors, conferences, papers, and contents), and health-care networks (linking together doctors, nurses, patients, diseases, and treatments). Researchers have proposed multiple statistical models for modeling homogeneous networks. The most well-known generative models are the random graph model (i.e., the Erd¨os-R´enyi model), the Watts-Strogatz model, and the scale-free model. The scale- free model assumes that the network follows the power law distribution (also known as the Pareto distribution or the heavy-tailed distribution). In most large-scale social networks, a small-world phenomenon is observed, that is, the network can be char- acterized as having a high degree of local clustering for a small fraction of the nodes (i.e., these nodes are interconnected with one another), while being no more than a few degrees of separation from the remaining nodes. Social networks exhibit certain evolutionary characteristics. They tend to follow the densiﬁcation power law, which states that networks become increasingly dense over time. Shrinking diameter is another characteristic, where the effective diameter often decreases as the network grows. Node out-degrees and in-degrees typically follow a heavy- tailed distribution. Data Cleaning, Integration, and Validation by Information Network Analysis Real-world data are often incomplete, noisy, uncertain, and unreliable. Information redundancy may exist among the multiple pieces of data that are interconnected in a large network. Information redundancy can be explored in such networks to perform quality data cleaning, data integration, information validation, and trustability analy- sis by network analysis. For example, we can distinguish authors who share the same names by examining the networked connections with other heterogeneous objects such as coauthors, publication venues, and terms. In addition, we can identify inaccurate author information presented by booksellers by exploring a network built based on author information provided by multiple booksellers. Sophisticated information network analysis methods have been developed in this direction, and in many cases, portions of the data serve as the “training set.” That is, relatively clean and reliable data or a consensus of data from multiple information 13.1 Mining Complex Data Types 593 providers can be used to help consolidate the remaining, unreliable portions of the data. This reduces the costly efforts of labeling the data by hand and of training on massive, dynamic, real-world data sets. Clustering and Classiﬁcation of Graphs and Homogeneous Networks Large graphs and networks have cohesive structures, which are often hidden among their massive, interconnected nodes and links. Cluster analysis methods have been devel- oped on large networks to uncover network structures, discover hidden communities, hubs, and outliers based on network topological structures and their associated prop- erties. Various kinds of network clustering methods have been developed and can be categorized as either partitioning, hierarchical, or density-based algorithms. Moreover, given human-labeled training data, the discovery of network structures can be guided by human-speciﬁed heuristic constraints. Supervised classiﬁcation and semi-supervised classiﬁcation of networks are recent hot topics in the data mining research community. Clustering, Ranking, and Classiﬁcation of Heterogeneous Networks A heterogeneous network contains interconnected nodes and links of different types. Such interconnected structures contain rich information, which can be used to mutu- ally enhance nodes and links, and propagate knowledge from one type to another. Clustering and ranking of such heterogeneous networks can be performed hand-in- hand in the context that highly ranked nodes/links in a cluster may contribute more than their lower-ranked counterparts in the evaluation of the cohesiveness of a cluster. Clustering may help consolidate the high ranking of objects/links dedicated to the clus- ter. Such mutual enhancement of ranking and clustering prompted the development of an algorithm called RankClus. Moreover, users may specify different ranking rules or present labeled nodes/links for certain data types. Knowledge of one type can be propagated to other types. Such propagation reaches the nodes/links of the same type via heterogeneous-type connections. Algorithms have been developed for supervised learning and semi-supervised learning in heterogeneous networks. Role Discovery and Link Prediction in Information Networks There exist many hidden roles or relationships among different nodes/links in a hetero- geneous network. Examples include advisor–advisee and leader–follower relationships in a research publication network. To discover such hidden roles or relationships, experts can specify constraints based on their background knowledge. Enforcing such con- straints may help cross-checking and validation in large interconnected networks. Information redundancy in a network can often be used to help weed out objects/links that do not follow such constraints. 594 Chapter 13 Data Mining Trends and Research Frontiers Similarly, link prediction can be performed based on the assessment of the rank- ing of the expected relationships among the candidate nodes/links. For example, we may predict which papers an author may write, read, or cite, based on the author’s recent publication history and the trend of research on similar topics. Such studies often require analyzing the proximity of network nodes/links and the trends and connections of their similar neighbors. Roughly speaking, people refer to link prediction as link mining; however, link mining covers additional tasks including link-based object classiﬁ- cation, object type prediction, link type prediction, link existence prediction, link cardinality estimation, and object reconciliation (which predicts whether two objects are, in fact, the same). It also includes group detection (which clusters objects), as well as subgraph iden- tiﬁcation (which ﬁnds characteristic subgraphs within networks) and metadata mining (which uncovers schema-type information regarding unstructured data). Similarity Search and OLAP in Information Networks Similarity search is a primitive operation in database and web search engines. A hetero- geneous information network consists of multityped, interconnected objects. Examples include bibliographic networks and social media networks, where two objects are con- sidered similar if they are linked in a similar way with multityped objects. In general, object similarity within a network can be determined based on network structures and object properties, and with similarity measures. Moreover, network clusters and hierarchical network structures help organize objects in a network and identify subcom- munities, as well as facilitate similarity search. Furthermore, similarity can be deﬁned differently per user. By considering different linkage paths, we can derive various similarity semantics in a network, which is known as path-based similarity. By organizing networks based on the notion of similarity and clusters, we can gen- erate multiple hierarchies within a network. Online analytical processing (OLAP) can then be performed. For example, we can drill down or dice information networks based on different levels of abstraction and different angles of views. OLAP operations may generate multiple, interrelated networks. The relationships among such networks may disclose interesting hidden semantics. Evolution of Social and Information Networks Networks are dynamic and constantly evolving. Detecting evolving communities and evolving regularities or anomalies in homogeneous or heterogeneous networks can help people better understand the structural evolution of networks and predict trends and irregularities in evolving networks. For homogeneous networks, the evolving commu- nities discovered are subnetworks consisting of objects of the same type such as a set of friends or coauthors. However, for heterogeneous networks, the communities discov- ered are subnetworks consisting of objects of different types, such as a connected set of papers, authors, venues, and terms, from which we can also derive a set of evolving objects for each type, like evolving authors and themes. 13.1 Mining Complex Data Types 595 13.1.3 Mining Other Kinds of Data In addition to sequences and graphs, there are many other kinds of semi-structured or unstructured data, such as spatiotemporal, multimedia, and hypertext data, which have interesting applications. Such data carry various kinds of semantics, are either stored in or dynamically streamed through a system, and call for specialized data mining methodologies. Thus, mining multiple kinds of data, including spatial data, spatiotem- poral data, cyber-physical system data, multimedia data, text data, web data, and data streams, are increasingly important tasks in data mining. In this subsection, we overview the methodologies for mining these kinds of data. Mining Spatial Data Spatial data mining discovers patterns and knowledge from spatial data. Spatial data, in many cases, refer to geospace-related data stored in geospatial data repositories. The data can be in “vector” or “raster” formats, or in the form of imagery and geo-referenced multimedia. Recently, large geographic data warehouses have been constructed by inte- grating thematic and geographically referenced data from multiple sources. From these, we can construct spatial data cubes that contain spatial dimensions and measures, and support spatial OLAP for multidimensional spatial data analysis. Spatial data mining can be performed on spatial data warehouses, spatial databases, and other geospatial data repositories. Popular topics on geographic knowledge discovery and spatial data min- ing include mining spatial associations and co-location patterns, spatial clustering, spatial classiﬁcation, spatial modeling, and spatial trend and outlier analysis. Mining Spatiotemporal Data and Moving Objects Spatiotemporal data are data that relate to both space and time. Spatiotemporal data mining refers to the process of discovering patterns and knowledge from spatiotemporal data. Typical examples of spatiotemporal data mining include discovering the evolution- ary history of cities and lands, uncovering weather patterns, predicting earthquakes and hurricanes, and determining global warming trends. Spatiotemporal data mining has become increasingly important and has far-reaching implications, given the popular- ity of mobile phones, GPS devices, Internet-based map services, weather services, and digital Earth, as well as satellite, RFID, sensor, wireless, and video technologies. Among many kinds of spatiotemporal data, moving-object data (i.e., data about mov- ing objects) are especially important. For example, animal scientists attach telemetry equipment on wildlife to analyze ecological behavior, mobility managers embed GPS in cars to better monitor and guide vehicles, and meteorologists use weather satel- lites and radars to observe hurricanes. Massive-scale moving-object data are becoming rich, complex, and ubiquitous. Examples of moving-object data mining include mining movement patterns of multiple moving objects (i.e., the discovery of relationships among multiple moving objects such as moving clusters, leaders and followers, merge, convoy, swarm, and pincer, as well as other collective movement patterns). Other examples of 596 Chapter 13 Data Mining Trends and Research Frontiers moving-object data mining include mining periodic patterns for one or a set of moving objects, and mining trajectory patterns, clusters, models, and outliers. Mining Cyber-Physical System Data A cyber-physical system (CPS) typically consists of a large number of interacting physical and information components. CPS systems may be interconnected so as to form large heterogeneous cyber-physical networks. Examples of cyber-physical networks include a patient care system that links a patient monitoring system with a network of patient/medical information and an emergency handling system; a transportation system that links a transportation monitoring network, consisting of many sensors and video cameras, with a trafﬁc information and control system; and a battleﬁeld comman- der system that links a sensor/reconnaissance network with a battleﬁeld information analysis system. Clearly, cyber-physical systems and networks will be ubiquitous and form a critical component of modern information infrastructure. Data generated in cyber-physical systems are dynamic, volatile, noisy, inconsistent, and interdependent, containing rich spatiotemporal information, and they are critically important for real-time decision making. In comparison with typical spatiotemporal data mining, mining cyber-physical data requires linking the current situation with a large information base, performing real-time calculations, and returning prompt responses. Research in the area includes rare-event detection and anomaly analysis in cyber-physical data streams, reliability and trustworthiness in cyber-physical data analy- sis, effective spatiotemporal data analysis in cyber-physical networks, and the integration of stream data mining with real-time automated control processes. Mining Multimedia Data Multimedia data mining is the discovery of interesting patterns from multimedia databases that store and manage large collections of multimedia objects, including image data, video data, audio data, as well as sequence data and hypertext data containing text, text markups, and linkages. Multimedia data mining is an interdisciplinary ﬁeld that integrates image processing and understanding, computer vision, data mining, and pattern recognition. Issues in multimedia data mining include content-based retrieval and similarity search, and generalization and multidimensional analysis. Multimedia data cubes contain additional dimensions and measures for multimedia information. Other topics in multimedia mining include classiﬁcation and prediction analysis, mining associations, and video and audio data mining (Section 13.2.3). Mining Text Data Text mining is an interdisciplinary ﬁeld that draws on information retrieval, data min- ing, machine learning, statistics, and computational linguistics. A substantial portion of information is stored as text such as news articles, technical papers, books, digital libraries, email messages, blogs, and web pages. Hence, research in text mining has been very active. An important goal is to derive high-quality information from text. This is 13.1 Mining Complex Data Types 597 typically done through the discovery of patterns and trends by means such as statistical pattern learning, topic modeling, and statistical language modeling. Text mining usu- ally requires structuring the input text (e.g., parsing, along with the addition of some derived linguistic features and the removal of others, and subsequent insertion into a database). This is followed by deriving patterns within the structured data, and evalua- tion and interpretation of the output. “High quality” in text mining usually refers to a combination of relevance, novelty, and interestingness. Typical text mining tasks include text categorization, text clustering, concept/entity extraction, production of granular taxonomies, sentiment analysis, document summa- rization, and entity-relation modeling (i.e., learning relations between named entities). Other examples include multilingual data mining, multidimensional text analysis, con- textual text mining, and trust and evolution analysis in text data, as well as text mining applications in security, biomedical literature analysis, online media analysis, and ana- lytical customer relationship management. Various kinds of text mining and analysis software and tools are available in academic institutions, open-source forums, and industry. Text mining often also uses WordNet, Sematic Web, Wikipedia, and other information sources to enhance the understanding and mining of text data. Mining Web Data The World Wide Web serves as a huge, widely distributed, global information center for news, advertisements, consumer information, ﬁnancial management, education, gov- ernment, and e-commerce. It contains a rich and dynamic collection of information about web page contents with hypertext structures and multimedia, hyperlink informa- tion, and access and usage information, providing fertile sources for data mining. Web mining is the application of data mining techniques to discover patterns, structures, and knowledge from the Web. According to analysis targets, web mining can be organized into three main areas: web content mining, web structure mining, and web usage mining. Web content mining analyzes web content such as text, multimedia data, and struc- tured data (within web pages or linked across web pages). This is done to understand the content of web pages, provide scalable and informative keyword-based page indexing, entity/concept resolution, web page relevance and ranking, web page content sum- maries, and other valuable information related to web search and analysis. Web pages can reside either on the surface web or on the deep Web. The surface web is that por- tion of the Web that is indexed by typical search engines. The deep Web (or hidden Web) refers to web content that is not part of the surface web. Its contents are provided by underlying database engines. Web content mining has been studied extensively by researchers, search engines, and other web service companies. Web content mining can build links across multiple web pages for individuals; therefore, it has the potential to inappropriately disclose personal information. Studies on privacy-preserving data mining address this concern through the development of techniques to protect personal privacy on the Web. Web structure mining is the process of using graph and network mining theory and methods to analyze the nodes and connection structures on the Web. It extracts patterns from hyperlinks, where a hyperlink is a structural component that connects a 598 Chapter 13 Data Mining Trends and Research Frontiers web page to another location. It can also mine the document structure within a page (e.g., analyze the treelike structure of page structures to describe HTML or XML tag usage). Both kinds of web structure mining help us understand web contents and may also help transform web contents into relatively structured data sets. Web usage mining is the process of extracting useful information (e.g., user click streams) from server logs. It ﬁnds patterns related to general or particular groups of users; understands users’ search patterns, trends, and associations; and predicts what users are looking for on the Internet. It helps improve search efﬁciency and effectiveness, as well as promotes products or related information to different groups of users at the right time. Web search companies routinely conduct web usage mining to improve their quality of service. Mining Data Streams Stream data refer to data that ﬂow into a system in vast volumes, change dynamically, are possibly inﬁnite, and contain multidimensional features. Such data cannot be stored in traditional database systems. Moreover, most systems may only be able to read the stream once in sequential order. This poses great challenges for the effective mining of stream data. Substantial research has led to progress in the development of efﬁ- cient methods for mining data streams, in the areas of mining frequent and sequential patterns, multidimensional analysis (e.g., the construction of stream cubes), classiﬁca- tion, clustering, outlier analysis, and the online detection of rare events in data streams. The general philosophy is to develop single-scan or a-few-scan algorithms using limited computing and storage capabilities. This includes collecting information about stream data in sliding windows or tilted time windows (where the most recent data are registered at the ﬁnest granularity and the more distant data are registered at a coarser granularity), and exploring techniques like microclustering, limited aggregation, and approximation. Many applications of stream data mining can be explored—for example, real-time detection of anomalies in computer network trafﬁc, botnets, text streams, video streams, power-grid ﬂows, web searches, sensor networks, and cyber-physical systems. 13.2 Other Methodologies of Data Mining Due to the broad scope of data mining and the large variety of data mining method- ologies, not all methodologies of data mining can be thoroughly covered in this book. In this section, we brieﬂy discuss several interesting methodologies that were not fully addressed in the previous chapters. These methodologies are listed in Figure 13.3. 13.2.1 Statistical Data Mining The data mining techniques described in this book are primarily drawn from computer science disciplines, including data mining, machine learning, data warehousing, and algorithms. They are designed for the efﬁcient handling of huge amounts of data that are 13.2 Other Methodologies of Data Mining 599 O t h e r D a t a M i n i n g M e t h o d o l o g i e s Statistical Data Mining Visual and Audio Data Mining Foundations of Data Mining Data reduction Data compression Probability and statistical theory Microeconomic view Pattern discovery and inductive database Data visualization Data mining result visualization Data mining process visualization Interactive visual data mining Audio data mining Regression Generalized linear models Analysis of variance Mixed-effect models Factor analysis Discriminant analysis Survival analysis Figure 13.3 Other data mining methodologies. typically multidimensional and possibly of various complex types. There are, however, many well-established statistical techniques for data analysis, particularly for numeric data. These techniques have been applied extensively to scientiﬁc data (e.g., data from experiments in physics, engineering, manufacturing, psychology, and medicine), as well as to data from economics and the social sciences. Some of these techniques, such as principal components analysis (Chapter 3) and clustering (Chapters 10 and 11), have already been addressed in this book. A thorough discussion of major statistical methods for data analysis is beyond the scope of this book; however, several methods are men- tioned here for the sake of completeness. Pointers to these techniques are provided in the bibliographic notes (Section 13.8). Regression: In general, these methods are used to predict the value of a response (dependent) variable from one or more predictor (independent) variables, where the variables are numeric. There are various forms of regression, such as linear, multi- ple, weighted, polynomial, nonparametric, and robust (robust methods are useful when errors fail to satisfy normalcy conditions or when the data contain signiﬁcant outliers). Generalized linear models: These models, and their generalization (generalized addi- tive models), allow a categorical (nominal) response variable (or some transformation 600 Chapter 13 Data Mining Trends and Research Frontiers of it) to be related to a set of predictor variables in a manner similar to the model- ing of a numeric response variable using linear regression. Generalized linear models include logistic regression and Poisson regression. Analysis of variance: These techniques analyze experimental data for two or more populations described by a numeric response variable and one or more categorical variables (factors). In general, an ANOVA (single-factor analysis of variance) problem involves a comparison of k population or treatment means to determine if at least two of the means are different. More complex ANOVA problems also exist. Mixed-effect models: These models are for analyzing grouped data—data that can be classiﬁed according to one or more grouping variables. They typically describe relationships between a response variable and some covariates in data grouped according to one or more factors. Common areas of application include multilevel data, repeated measures data, block designs, and longitudinal data. Factor analysis: This method is used to determine which variables are combined to generate a given factor. For example, for many psychiatric data, it is not possible to measure a certain factor of interest directly (e.g., intelligence); however, it is often possible to measure other quantities (e.g., student test scores) that reﬂect the factor of interest. Here, none of the variables is designated as dependent. Discriminant analysis: This technique is used to predict a categorical response vari- able. Unlike generalized linear models, it assumes that the independent variables follow a multivariate normal distribution. The procedure attempts to determine several discriminant functions (linear combinations of the independent variables) that discriminate among the groups deﬁned by the response variable. Discriminant analysis is commonly used in social sciences. Survival analysis: Several well-established statistical techniques exist for survival analysis. These techniques originally were designed to predict the probability that a patient undergoing a medical treatment would survive at least to time t. Methods for survival analysis, however, are also commonly applied to manufacturing settings to estimate the life span of industrial equipment. Popular methods include Kaplan- Meier estimates of survival, Cox proportional hazards regression models, and their extensions. Quality control: Various statistics can be used to prepare charts for quality control, such as Shewhart charts and CUSUM charts (both of which display group sum- mary statistics). These statistics include the mean, standard deviation, range, count, moving average, moving standard deviation, and moving range. 13.2.2 Views on Data Mining Foundations Research on the theoretical foundations of data mining has yet to mature. A solid and systematic theoretical foundation is important because it can help provide a coherent 13.2 Other Methodologies of Data Mining 601 framework for the development, evaluation, and practice of data mining technology. Several theories for the basis of data mining include the following: Data reduction: In this theory, the basis of data mining is to