to remove noise without smoothing out the main features of the data, making it effective for data 3In our notation, any variable representing a vector is shown in bold italic font; measurements depicting the vector are shown in italic font. 3.4 Data Reduction 101 cleaning as well. Given a set of coefﬁcients, an approximation of the original data can be constructed by applying the inverse of the DWT used. The DWT is closely related to the discrete Fourier transform (DFT), a signal process- ing technique involving sines and cosines. In general, however, the DWT achieves better lossy compression. That is, if the same number of coefﬁcients is retained for a DWT and a DFT of a given data vector, the DWT version will provide a more accurate approxima- tion of the original data. Hence, for an equivalent approximation, the DWT requires less space than the DFT. Unlike the DFT, wavelets are quite localized in space, contributing to the conservation of local detail. There is only one DFT, yet there are several families of DWTs. Figure 3.4 shows some wavelet families. Popular wavelet transforms include the Haar-2, Daubechies-4, and Daubechies-6. The general procedure for applying a discrete wavelet transform uses a hierarchical pyramid algorithm that halves the data at each iteration, resulting in fast computational speed. The method is as follows: 1. The length, L, of the input data vector must be an integer power of 2. This condition can be met by padding the data vector with zeros as necessary (L ≥n). 2. Each transform involves applying two functions. The ﬁrst applies some data smooth- ing, such as a sum or weighted average. The second performs a weighted difference, which acts to bring out the detailed features of the data. 3. The two functions are applied to pairs of data points in X, that is, to all pairs of measurements (x2i,x2i+1). This results in two data sets of length L/2. In general, these represent a smoothed or low-frequency version of the input data and the high- frequency content of it, respectively. 4. The two functions are recursively applied to the data sets obtained in the previous loop, until the resulting data sets obtained are of length 2. 5. Selected values from the data sets obtained in the previous iterations are designated the wavelet coefﬁcients of the transformed data. 0 2 4 6 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 (a) Haar-2 (b) Daubechies-4 1.0 1.5 2.0 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 Figure 3.4 Examples of wavelet families. The number next to a wavelet name is the number of vanishing moments of the wavelet. This is a set of mathematical relationships that the coefﬁcients must satisfy and is related to the number of coefﬁcients. 102 Chapter 3 Data Preprocessing Equivalently, a matrix multiplication can be applied to the input data in order to obtain the wavelet coefﬁcients, where the matrix used depends on the given DWT. The matrix must be orthonormal, meaning that the columns are unit vectors and are mutu- ally orthogonal, so that the matrix inverse is just its transpose. Although we do not have room to discuss it here, this property allows the reconstruction of the data from the smooth and smooth-difference data sets. By factoring the matrix used into a product of a few sparse matrices, the resulting “fast DWT” algorithm has a complexity of O(n) for an input vector of length n. Wavelet transforms can be applied to multidimensional data such as a data cube. This is done by ﬁrst applying the transform to the ﬁrst dimension, then to the second, and so on. The computational complexity involved is linear with respect to the number of cells in the cube. Wavelet transforms give good results on sparse or skewed data and on data with ordered attributes. Lossy compression by wavelets is reportedly better than JPEG compression, the current commercial standard. Wavelet transforms have many real- world applications, including the compression of ﬁngerprint images, computer vision, analysis of time-series data, and data cleaning. 3.4.3 Principal Components Analysis In this subsection we provide an intuitive introduction to principal components analy- sis as a method of dimesionality reduction. A detailed theoretical explanation is beyond the scope of this book. For additional references, please see the bibliographic notes (Section 3.8) at the end of this chapter. Suppose that the data to be reduced consist of tuples or data vectors described by n attributes or dimensions. Principal components analysis (PCA; also called the Karhunen-Loeve, or K-L, method) searches for k n-dimensional orthogonal vectors that can best be used to represent the data, where k ≤n. The original data are thus projected onto a much smaller space, resulting in dimensionality reduction. Unlike attribute sub- set selection (Section 3.4.4), which reduces the attribute set size by retaining a subset of the initial set of attributes, PCA “combines” the essence of attributes by creating an alter- native, smaller set of variables. The initial data can then be projected onto this smaller set. PCA often reveals relationships that were not previously suspected and thereby allows interpretations that would not ordinarily result. The basic procedure is as follows: 1. The input data are normalized, so that each attribute falls within the same range. This step helps ensure that attributes with large domains will not dominate attributes with smaller domains. 2. PCA computes k orthonormal vectors that provide a basis for the normalized input data. These are unit vectors that each point in a direction perpendicular to the others. These vectors are referred to as the principal components. The input data are a linear combination of the principal components. 3. The principal components are sorted in order of decreasing “signiﬁcance” or strength. The principal components essentially serve as a new set of axes for the data, 3.4 Data Reduction 103 X2 X1 Y1 Y2 Figure 3.5 Principal components analysis. Y1 and Y2 are the ﬁrst two principal components for the given data. providing important information about variance. That is, the sorted axes are such that the ﬁrst axis shows the most variance among the data, the second axis shows the next highest variance, and so on. For example, Figure 3.5 shows the ﬁrst two princi- pal components, Y1 and Y2, for the given set of data originally mapped to the axes X1 and X2. This information helps identify groups or patterns within the data. 4. Because the components are sorted in decreasing order of “signiﬁcance,” the data size can be reduced by eliminating the weaker components, that is, those with low vari- ance. Using the strongest principal components, it should be possible to reconstruct a good approximation of the original data. PCA can be applied to ordered and unordered attributes, and can handle sparse data and skewed data. Multidimensional data of more than two dimensions can be han- dled by reducing the problem to two dimensions. Principal components may be used as inputs to multiple regression and cluster analysis. In comparison with wavelet trans- forms, PCA tends to be better at handling sparse data, whereas wavelet transforms are more suitable for data of high dimensionality. 3.4.4 Attribute Subset Selection Data sets for analysis may contain hundreds of attributes, many of which may be irrel- evant to the mining task or redundant. For example, if the task is to classify customers based on whether or not they are likely to purchase a popular new CD at AllElectronics when notiﬁed of a sale, attributes such as the customer’s telephone number are likely to be irrelevant, unlike attributes such as age or music taste. Although it may be possible for a domain expert to pick out some of the useful attributes, this can be a difﬁcult and time- consuming task, especially when the data’s behavior is not well known. (Hence, a reason behind its analysis!) Leaving out relevant attributes or keeping irrelevant attributes may be detrimental, causing confusion for the mining algorithm employed. This can result in discovered patterns of poor quality. In addition, the added volume of irrelevant or redundant attributes can slow down the mining process. 104 Chapter 3 Data Preprocessing Attribute subset selection4 reduces the data set size by removing irrelevant or redundant attributes (or dimensions). The goal of attribute subset selection is to ﬁnd a minimum set of attributes such that the resulting probability distribution of the data classes is as close as possible to the original distribution obtained using all attributes. Mining on a reduced set of attributes has an additional beneﬁt: It reduces the number of attributes appearing in the discovered patterns, helping to make the patterns easier to understand. “How can we ﬁnd a ‘good’ subset of the original attributes?” For n attributes, there are 2n possible subsets. An exhaustive search for the optimal subset of attributes can be pro- hibitively expensive, especially as n and the number of data classes increase. Therefore, heuristic methods that explore a reduced search space are commonly used for attribute subset selection. These methods are typically greedy in that, while searching through attribute space, they always make what looks to be the best choice at the time. Their strategy is to make a locally optimal choice in the hope that this will lead to a globally optimal solution. Such greedy methods are effective in practice and may come close to estimating an optimal solution. The “best” (and “worst”) attributes are typically determined using tests of statistical signiﬁcance, which assume that the attributes are independent of one another. Many other attribute evaluation measures can be used such as the information gain measure used in building decision trees for classiﬁcation.5 Basic heuristic methods of attribute subset selection include the techniques that follow, some of which are illustrated in Figure 3.6. Forward selection Initial attribute set: {A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A6} Initial reduced set: {} => {A1} => {A1, A4} => Reduced attribute set: {A1, A4, A6} Initial attribute set: {A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A6} => {A1, A3, A4, A5, A6} => {A1, A4, A5, A6} => Reduced attribute set: {A1, A4, A6} Initial attribute set: {A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A6} => Reduced attribute set: {A1, A4, A6} Backward elimination Decision tree induction A4? A1? A6? Class 1 Class 2 Class 1 Class 2 Y N Y N Y N Figure 3.6 Greedy (heuristic) methods for attribute subset selection. 4In machine learning, attribute subset selection is known as feature subset selection. 5The information gain measure is described in detail in Chapter 8. 3.4 Data Reduction 105 1. Stepwise forward selection: The procedure starts with an empty set of attributes as the reduced set. The best of the original attributes is determined and added to the reduced set. At each subsequent iteration or step, the best of the remaining original attributes is added to the set. 2. Stepwise backward elimination: The procedure starts with the full set of attributes. At each step, it removes the worst attribute remaining in the set. 3. Combination of forward selection and backward elimination: The stepwise for- ward selection and backward elimination methods can be combined so that, at each step, the procedure selects the best attribute and removes the worst from among the remaining attributes. 4. Decision tree induction: Decision tree algorithms (e.g., ID3, C4.5, and CART) were originally intended for classiﬁcation. Decision tree induction constructs a ﬂowchart- like structure where each internal (nonleaf) node denotes a test on an attribute, each branch corresponds to an outcome of the test, and each external (leaf) node denotes a class prediction. At each node, the algorithm chooses the “best” attribute to partition the data into individual classes. When decision tree induction is used for attribute subset selection, a tree is con- structed from the given data. All attributes that do not appear in the tree are assumed to be irrelevant. The set of attributes appearing in the tree form the reduced subset of attributes. The stopping criteria for the methods may vary. The procedure may employ a threshold on the measure used to determine when to stop the attribute selection process. In some cases, we may want to create new attributes based on others. Such attribute construction6 can help improve accuracy and understanding of structure in high- dimensional data. For example, we may wish to add the attribute area based on the attributes height and width. By combining attributes, attribute construction can dis- cover missing information about the relationships between data attributes that can be useful for knowledge discovery. 3.4.5 Regression and Log-Linear Models: Parametric Data Reduction Regression and log-linear models can be used to approximate the given data. In (simple) linear regression, the data are modeled to ﬁt a straight line. For example, a random variable, y (called a response variable), can be modeled as a linear function of another random variable, x (called a predictor variable), with the equation y = wx + b, (3.7) where the variance of y is assumed to be constant. In the context of data mining, x and y are numeric database attributes. The coefﬁcients, w and b (called regression coefﬁcients), 6In the machine learning literature, attribute construction is known as feature construction. 106 Chapter 3 Data Preprocessing specify the slope of the line and the y-intercept, respectively. These coefﬁcients can be solved for by the method of least squares, which minimizes the error between the actual line separating the data and the estimate of the line. Multiple linear regression is an extension of (simple) linear regression, which allows a response variable, y, to be modeled as a linear function of two or more predictor variables. Log-linear models approximate discrete multidimensional probability distributions. Given a set of tuples in n dimensions (e.g., described by n attributes), we can con- sider each tuple as a point in an n-dimensional space. Log-linear models can be used to estimate the probability of each point in a multidimensional space for a set of dis- cretized attributes, based on a smaller subset of dimensional combinations. This allows a higher-dimensional data space to be constructed from lower-dimensional spaces. Log-linear models are therefore also useful for dimensionality reduction (since the lower-dimensional points together typically occupy less space than the original data points) and data smoothing (since aggregate estimates in the lower-dimensional space are less subject to sampling variations than the estimates in the higher-dimensional space). Regression and log-linear models can both be used on sparse data, although their application may be limited. While both methods can handle skewed data, regression does exceptionally well. Regression can be computationally intensive when applied to high-dimensional data, whereas log-linear models show good scalability for up to 10 or so dimensions. Several software packages exist to solve regression problems. Examples include SAS (www.sas.com), SPSS (www.spss.com), and S-Plus (www.insightful.com). Another useful resource is the book Numerical Recipes in C, by Press, Teukolsky, Vetterling, and Flannery [PTVF07], and its associated source code. 3.4.6 Histograms Histograms use binning to approximate data distributions and are a popular form of data reduction. Histograms were introduced in Section 2.2.3. A histogram for an attribute, A, partitions the data distribution of A into disjoint subsets, referred to as buckets or bins. If each bucket represents only a single attribute–value/frequency pair, the buckets are called singleton buckets. Often, buckets instead represent continuous ranges for the given attribute. Example 3.3 Histograms. The following data are a list of AllElectronics prices for commonly sold items (rounded to the nearest dollar). The numbers have been sorted: 1, 1, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 8, 8, 10, 10, 10, 10, 12, 14, 14, 14, 15, 15, 15, 15, 15, 15, 18, 18, 18, 18, 18, 18, 18, 18, 20, 20, 20, 20, 20, 20, 20, 21, 21, 21, 21, 25, 25, 25, 25, 25, 28, 28, 30, 30, 30. Figure 3.7 shows a histogram for the data using singleton buckets. To further reduce the data, it is common to have each bucket denote a continuous value range for the given attribute. In Figure 3.8, each bucket represents a different $10 range for price. 3.4 Data Reduction 107 5 10 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 15 20 25 30 price ($) count Figure 3.7 A histogram for price using singleton buckets—each bucket represents one price–value/ frequency pair. 1–10 11–20 21–30 price ($) count 25 20 15 10 5 0 Figure 3.8 An equal-width histogram for price, where values are aggregated so that each bucket has a uniform width of $10. “How are the buckets determined and the attribute values partitioned?” There are several partitioning rules, including the following: Equal-width: In an equal-width histogram, the width of each bucket range is uniform (e.g., the width of $10 for the buckets in Figure 3.8). Equal-frequency (or equal-depth): In an equal-frequency histogram, the buckets are created so that, roughly, the frequency of each bucket is constant (i.e., each bucket contains roughly the same number of contiguous data samples). 108 Chapter 3 Data Preprocessing Histograms are highly effective at approximating both sparse and dense data, as well as highly skewed and uniform data. The histograms described before for single attributes can be extended for multiple attributes. Multidimensional histograms can cap- ture dependencies between attributes. These histograms have been found effective in approximating data with up to ﬁve attributes. More studies are needed regarding the effectiveness of multidimensional histograms for high dimensionalities. Singleton buckets are useful for storing high-frequency outliers. 3.4.7 Clustering Clustering techniques consider data tuples as objects. They partition the objects into groups, or clusters, so that objects within a cluster are “similar” to one another and “dis- similar” to objects in other clusters. Similarity is commonly deﬁned in terms of how “close” the objects are in space, based on a distance function. The “quality” of a cluster may be represented by its diameter, the maximum distance between any two objects in the cluster. Centroid distance is an alternative measure of cluster quality and is deﬁned as the average distance of each cluster object from the cluster centroid (denoting the “average object,” or average point in space for the cluster). Figure 3.3 showed a 2-D plot of customer data with respect to customer locations in a city. Three data clusters are visible. In data reduction, the cluster representations of the data are used to replace the actual data. The effectiveness of this technique depends on the data’s nature. It is much more effective for data that can be organized into distinct clusters than for smeared data. There are many measures for deﬁning clusters and cluster quality. Clustering meth- ods are further described in Chapters 10 and 11. 3.4.8 Sampling Sampling can be used as a data reduction technique because it allows a large data set to be represented by a much smaller random data sample (or subset). Suppose that a large data set, D, contains N tuples. Let’s look at the most common ways that we could sample D for data reduction, as illustrated in Figure 3.9. Simple random sample without replacement (SRSWOR) of size s: This is created by drawing s of the N tuples from D (s < N), where the probability of drawing any tuple in D is 1/N, that is, all tuples are equally likely to be sampled. Simple random sample with replacement (SRSWR) of size s: This is similar to SRSWOR, except that each time a tuple is drawn from D, it is recorded and then replaced. That is, after a tuple is drawn, it is placed back in D so that it may be drawn again. Cluster sample: If the tuples in D are grouped into M mutually disjoint “clusters,” then an SRS of s clusters can be obtained, where s < M. For example, tuples in a database are usually retrieved a page at a time, so that each page can be considered 3.4 Data Reduction 109 Cluster sample Startified sample Figure 3.9 Sampling can be used for data reduction. a cluster. A reduced data representation can be obtained by applying, say, SRSWOR to the pages, resulting in a cluster sample of the tuples. Other clustering criteria con- veying rich semantics can also be explored. For example, in a spatial database, we may choose to deﬁne clusters geographically based on how closely different areas are located. Stratiﬁed sample: If D is divided into mutually disjoint parts called strata, a stratiﬁed sample of D is generated by obtaining an SRS at each stratum. This helps ensure a 110 Chapter 3 Data Preprocessing representative sample, especially when the data are skewed. For example, a stratiﬁed sample may be obtained from customer data, where a stratum is created for each cus- tomer age group. In this way, the age group having the smallest number of customers will be sure to be represented. An advantage of sampling for data reduction is that the cost of obtaining a sample is proportional to the size of the sample, s, as opposed to N, the data set size. Hence, sampling complexity is potentially sublinear to the size of the data. Other data reduc- tion techniques can require at least one complete pass through D. For a ﬁxed sample size, sampling complexity increases only linearly as the number of data dimensions, n, increases, whereas techniques using histograms, for example, increase exponentially in n. When applied to data reduction, sampling is most commonly used to estimate the answer to an aggregate query. It is possible (using the central limit theorem) to deter- mine a sufﬁcient sample size for estimating a given function within a speciﬁed degree of error. This sample size, s, may be extremely small in comparison to N. Sampling is a natural choice for the progressive reﬁnement of a reduced data set. Such a set can be further reﬁned by simply increasing the sample size. 3.4.9 Data Cube Aggregation Imagine that you have collected the data for your analysis. These data consist of the AllElectronics sales per quarter, for the years 2008 to 2010. You are, however, interested in the annual sales (total per year), rather than the total per quarter. Thus, the data can be aggregated so that the resulting data summarize the total sales per year instead of per quarter. This aggregation is illustrated in Figure 3.10. The resulting data set is smaller in volume, without loss of information necessary for the analysis task. Data cubes are discussed in detail in Chapter 4 on data warehousing and Chapter 5 on data cube technology. We brieﬂy introduce some concepts here. Data cubes store Quarter Year 2010 Sales Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 $224,000 $408,000 $350,000 $586,000 Quarter Year 2009 Sales Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 $224,000 $408,000 $350,000 $586,000 Quarter Year 2008 Sales Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 $224,000 $408,000 $350,000 $586,000 Year Sales 2008 2009 2010 $1,568,000 $2,356,000 $3,594,000 Figure 3.10 Sales data for a given branch of AllElectronics for the years 2008 through 2010. On the left, the sales are shown per quarter. On the right, the data are aggregated to provide the annual sales. 3.5 Data Transformation and Data Discretization 111 568 A B C D 750 150 50 home entertainment computer phone security 2008 2009 year item_type branch 2010 Figure 3.11 A data cube for sales at AllElectronics. multidimensional aggregated information. For example, Figure 3.11 shows a data cube for multidimensional analysis of sales data with respect to annual sales per item type for each AllElectronics branch. Each cell holds an aggregate data value, corresponding to the data point in multidimensional space. (For readability, only some cell values are shown.) Concept hierarchies may exist for each attribute, allowing the analysis of data at multiple abstraction levels. For example, a hierarchy for branch could allow branches to be grouped into regions, based on their address. Data cubes provide fast access to precomputed, summarized data, thereby beneﬁting online analytical processing as well as data mining. The cube created at the lowest abstraction level is referred to as the base cuboid. The base cuboid should correspond to an individual entity of interest such as sales or cus- tomer. In other words, the lowest level should be usable, or useful for the analysis. A cube at the highest level of abstraction is the apex cuboid. For the sales data in Figure 3.11, the apex cuboid would give one total—the total sales for all three years, for all item types, and for all branches. Data cubes created for varying levels of abstraction are often referred to as cuboids, so that a data cube may instead refer to a lattice of cuboids. Each higher abstraction level further reduces the resulting data size. When replying to data mining requests, the smallest available cuboid relevant to the given task should be used. This issue is also addressed in Chapter 4. 3.5 Data Transformation and Data Discretization This section presents methods of data transformation. In this preprocessing step, the data are transformed or consolidated so that the resulting mining process may be more efﬁcient, and the patterns found may be easier to understand. Data discretization, a form of data transformation, is also discussed. 112 Chapter 3 Data Preprocessing 3.5.1 Data Transformation Strategies Overview In data transformation, the data are transformed or consolidated into forms appropriate for mining. Strategies for data transformation include the following: 1. Smoothing, which works to remove noise from the data. Techniques include binning, regression, and clustering. 2. Attribute construction (or feature construction), where new attributes are con- structed and added from the given set of attributes to help the mining process. 3. Aggregation, where summary or aggregation operations are applied to the data. For example, the daily sales data may be aggregated so as to compute monthly and annual total amounts. This step is typically used in constructing a data cube for data analysis at multiple abstraction levels. 4. Normalization, where the attribute data are scaled so as to fall within a smaller range, such as −1.0 to 1.0, or 0.0 to 1.0. 5. Discretization, where the raw values of a numeric attribute (e.g., age) are replaced by interval labels (e.g., 0–10, 11–20, etc.) or conceptual labels (e.g., youth, adult, senior). The labels, in turn, can be recursively organized into higher-level concepts, resulting in a concept hierarchy for the numeric attribute. Figure 3.12 shows a concept hierarchy for the attribute price. More than one concept hierarchy can be deﬁned for the same attribute to accommodate the needs of various users. 6. Concept hierarchy generation for nominal data, where attributes such as street can be generalized to higher-level concepts, like city or country. Many hierarchies for nominal attributes are implicit within the database schema and can be automatically deﬁned at the schema deﬁnition level. Recall that there is much overlap between the major data preprocessing tasks. The ﬁrst three of these strategies were discussed earlier in this chapter. Smoothing is a form of ($600...$800] ($800...$1000] ($400...$600] ($200...$400] ($0...$200] ($0...$1000] ($900... $1000] ($800... $900] ($700... $800] ($600... $700] ($500... $600] ($100... $200] ($400... $500] ($0... $100] ($200... $300] ($300... $400] Figure 3.12 A concept hierarchy for the attribute price, where an interval ($X ...$Y] denotes the range from $X (exclusive) to $Y (inclusive). 3.5 Data Transformation and Data Discretization 113 data cleaning and was addressed in Section 3.2.2. Section 3.2.3 on the data cleaning process also discussed ETL tools, where users specify transformations to correct data inconsistencies. Attribute construction and aggregation were discussed in Section 3.4 on data reduction. In this section, we therefore concentrate on the latter three strategies. Discretization techniques can be categorized based on how the discretization is per- formed, such as whether it uses class information or which direction it proceeds (i.e., top-down vs. bottom-up). If the discretization process uses class information, then we say it is supervised discretization. Otherwise, it is unsupervised. If the process starts by ﬁrst ﬁnding one or a few points (called split points or cut points) to split the entire attribute range, and then repeats this recursively on the resulting intervals, it is called top-down discretization or splitting. This contrasts with bottom-up discretization or merging, which starts by considering all of the continuous values as potential split-points, removes some by merging neighborhood values to form intervals, and then recursively applies this process to the resulting intervals. Data discretization and concept hierarchy generation are also forms of data reduc- tion. The raw data are replaced by a smaller number of interval or concept labels. This simpliﬁes the original data and makes the mining more efﬁcient. The resulting patterns mined are typically easier to understand. Concept hierarchies are also useful for mining at multiple abstraction levels. The rest of this section is organized as follows. First, normalization techniques are presented in Section 3.5.2. We then describe several techniques for data discretization, each of which can be used to generate concept hierarchies for numeric attributes. The techniques include binning (Section 3.5.3) and histogram analysis (Section 3.5.4), as well as cluster analysis, decision tree analysis, and correlation analysis (Section 3.5.5). Finally, Section 3.5.6 describes the automatic generation of concept hierarchies for nominal data. 3.5.2 Data Transformation by Normalization The measurement unit used can affect the data analysis. For example, changing mea- surement units from meters to inches for height, or from kilograms to pounds for weight, may lead to very different results. In general, expressing an attribute in smaller units will lead to a larger range for that attribute, and thus tend to give such an attribute greater effect or “weight.” To help avoid dependence on the choice of measurement units, the data should be normalized or standardized. This involves transforming the data to fall within a smaller or common range such as [−1,1] or [0.0, 1.0]. (The terms standardize and normalize are used interchangeably in data preprocessing, although in statistics, the latter term also has other connotations.) Normalizing the data attempts to give all attributes an equal weight. Normaliza- tion is particularly useful for classiﬁcation algorithms involving neural networks or distance measurements such as nearest-neighbor classiﬁcation and clustering. If using the neural network backpropagation algorithm for classiﬁcation mining (Chapter 9), normalizing the input values for each attribute measured in the training tuples will help speed up the learning phase. For distance-based methods, normalization helps prevent 114 Chapter 3 Data Preprocessing attributes with initially large ranges (e.g., income) from outweighing attributes with initially smaller ranges (e.g., binary attributes). It is also useful when given no prior knowledge of the data. There are many methods for data normalization. We study min-max normalization, z-score normalization, and normalization by decimal scaling. For our discussion, let A be a numeric attribute with n observed values, v1,v2,...,vn. Min-max normalization performs a linear transformation on the original data. Sup- pose that minA and maxA are the minimum and maximum values of an attribute, A. Min-max normalization maps a value, vi, of A to v′ i in the range [new minA,new maxA] by computing v′ i = vi −minA maxA −minA (new maxA −new minA) + new minA. (3.8) Min-max normalization preserves the relationships among the original data values. It will encounter an “out-of-bounds” error if a future input case for normalization falls outside of the original data range for A. Example 3.4 Min-max normalization. Suppose that the minimum and maximum values for the attribute income are $12,000 and $98,000, respectively. We would like to map income to the range [0.0,1.0]. By min-max normalization, a value of $73,600 for income is transformed to 73,600−12,000 98,000−12,000(1.0 −0) + 0 = 0.716. In z-score normalization (or zero-mean normalization), the values for an attribute, A, are normalized based on the mean (i.e., average) and standard deviation of A. A value, vi, of A is normalized to v′ i by computing v′ i = vi −¯A σA , (3.9) where ¯A and σA are the mean and standard deviation, respectively, of attribute A. The mean and standard deviation were discussed in Section 2.2, where ¯A = 1 n(v1 + v2 + ··· + vn) and σA is computed as the square root of the variance of A (see Eq. (2.6)). This method of normalization is useful when the actual minimum and maximum of attribute A are unknown, or when there are outliers that dominate the min-max normalization. Example 3.5 z-score normalization. Suppose that the mean and standard deviation of the values for the attribute income are $54,000 and $16,000, respectively. With z-score normalization, a value of $73,600 for income is transformed to 73,600−54,000 16,000 = 1.225. A variation of this z-score normalization replaces the standard deviation of Eq. (3.9) by the mean absolute deviation of A. The mean absolute deviation of A, denoted sA, is sA = 1 n(|v1 −¯A| + |v2 −¯A| + ··· + |vn −¯A|). (3.10) 3.5 Data Transformation and Data Discretization 115 Thus, z-score normalization using the mean absolute deviation is v′ i = vi −¯A sA . (3.11) The mean absolute deviation, sA, is more robust to outliers than the standard deviation, σA. When computing the mean absolute deviation, the deviations from the mean (i.e., |xi −¯x|) are not squared; hence, the effect of outliers is somewhat reduced. Normalization by decimal scaling normalizes by moving the decimal point of values of attribute A. The number of decimal points moved depends on the maximum absolute value of A. A value, vi, of A is normalized to v′ i by computing v′ i = vi 10j , (3.12) where j is the smallest integer such that max(|v′ i|) < 1. Example 3.6 Decimal scaling. Suppose that the recorded values of A range from −986 to 917. The maximum absolute value of A is 986. To normalize by decimal scaling, we therefore divide each value by 1000 (i.e., j = 3) so that −986 normalizes to −0.986 and 917 normalizes to 0.917. Note that normalization can change the original data quite a bit, especially when using z-score normalization or decimal scaling. It is also necessary to save the normaliza- tion parameters (e.g., the mean and standard deviation if using z-score normalization) so that future data can be normalized in a uniform manner. 3.5.3 Discretization by Binning Binning is a top-down splitting technique based on a speciﬁed number of bins. Section 3.2.2 discussed binning methods for data smoothing. These methods are also used as discretization methods for data reduction and concept hierarchy generation. For example, attribute values can be discretized by applying equal-width or equal-frequency binning, and then replacing each bin value by the bin mean or median, as in smoothing by bin means or smoothing by bin medians, respectively. These techniques can be applied recursively to the resulting partitions to generate concept hierarchies. Binning does not use class information and is therefore an unsupervised discretiza- tion technique. It is sensitive to the user-speciﬁed number of bins, as well as the presence of outliers. 3.5.4 Discretization by Histogram Analysis Like binning, histogram analysis is an unsupervised discretization technique because it does not use class information. Histograms were introduced in Section 2.2.3. A his- togram partitions the values of an attribute, A, into disjoint ranges called buckets or bins. 116 Chapter 3 Data Preprocessing Various partitioning rules can be used to deﬁne histograms (Section 3.4.6). In an equal-width histogram, for example, the values are partitioned into equal-size partitions or ranges (e.g., earlier in Figure 3.8 for price, where each bucket has a width of $10). With an equal-frequency histogram, the values are partitioned so that, ideally, each par- tition contains the same number of data tuples. The histogram analysis algorithm can be applied recursively to each partition in order to automatically generate a multilevel con- cept hierarchy, with the procedure terminating once a prespeciﬁed number of concept levels has been reached. A minimum interval size can also be used per level to control the recursive procedure. This speciﬁes the minimum width of a partition, or the minimum number of values for each partition at each level. Histograms can also be partitioned based on cluster analysis of the data distribution, as described next. 3.5.5 Discretization by Cluster, Decision Tree, and Correlation Analyses Clustering, decision tree analysis, and correlation analysis can be used for data dis- cretization. We brieﬂy study each of these approaches. Cluster analysis is a popular data discretization method. A clustering algorithm can be applied to discretize a numeric attribute, A, by partitioning the values of A into clus- ters or groups. Clustering takes the distribution of A into consideration, as well as the closeness of data points, and therefore is able to produce high-quality discretization results. Clustering can be used to generate a concept hierarchy for A by following either a top-down splitting strategy or a bottom-up merging strategy, where each cluster forms a node of the concept hierarchy. In the former, each initial cluster or partition may be further decomposed into several subclusters, forming a lower level of the hiera- rchy. In the latter, clusters are formed by repeatedly grouping neighboring clusters in order to form higher-level concepts. Clustering methods for data mining are studied in Chapters 10 and 11. Techniques to generate decision trees for classiﬁcation (Chapter 8) can be applied to discretization. Such techniques employ a top-down splitting approach. Unlike the other methods mentioned so far, decision tree approaches to discretization are supervised, that is, they make use of class label information. For example, we may have a data set of patient symptoms (the attributes) where each patient has an associated diagnosis class label. Class distribution information is used in the calculation and determination of split-points (data values for partitioning an attribute range). Intuitively, the main idea is to select split-points so that a given resulting partition contains as many tuples of the same class as possible. Entropy is the most commonly used measure for this purpose. To discretize a numeric attribute, A, the method selects the value of A that has the minimum entropy as a split-point, and recursively partitions the resulting intervals to arrive at a hierarchical discretization. Such discretization forms a concept hierarchy for A. Because decision tree–based discretization uses class information, it is more likely that the interval boundaries (split-points) are deﬁned to occur in places that may help improve classiﬁcation accuracy. Decision trees and the entropy measure are described in greater detail in Section 8.2.2. 3.5 Data Transformation and Data Discretization 117 Measures of correlation can be used for discretization. ChiMerge is a χ2-based discretization method. The discretization methods that we have studied up to this point have all employed a top-down, splitting strategy. This contrasts with ChiMerge, which employs a bottom-up approach by ﬁnding the best neighboring intervals and then merging them to form larger intervals, recursively. As with decision tree analysis, ChiMerge is supervised in that it uses class information. The basic notion is that for accurate discretization, the relative class frequencies should be fairly consistent within an interval. Therefore, if two adjacent intervals have a very similar distribution of classes, then the intervals can be merged. Otherwise, they should remain separate. ChiMerge proceeds as follows. Initially, each distinct value of a numeric attribute A is considered to be one interval. χ2 tests are performed for every pair of adjacent intervals. Adjacent intervals with the least χ2 values are merged together, because low χ2 values for a pair indicate similar class distributions. This merging process proceeds recursively until a predeﬁned stopping criterion is met. 3.5.6 Concept Hierarchy Generation for Nominal Data We now look at data transformation for nominal data. In particular, we study concept hierarchy generation for nominal attributes. Nominal attributes have a ﬁnite (but pos- sibly large) number of distinct values, with no ordering among the values. Examples include geographic location, job category, and item type. Manual deﬁnition of concept hierarchies can be a tedious and time-consuming task for a user or a domain expert. Fortunately, many hierarchies are implicit within the database schema and can be automatically deﬁned at the schema deﬁnition level. The concept hierarchies can be used to transform the data into multiple levels of granular- ity. For example, data mining patterns regarding sales may be found relating to speciﬁc regions or countries, in addition to individual branch locations. We study four methods for the generation of concept hierarchies for nominal data, as follows. 1. Speciﬁcation of a partial ordering of attributes explicitly at the schema level by users or experts: Concept hierarchies for nominal attributes or dimensions typically involve a group of attributes. A user or expert can easily deﬁne a concept hierarchy by specifying a partial or total ordering of the attributes at the schema level. For exam- ple, suppose that a relational database contains the following group of attributes: street, city, province or state, and country. Similarly, a data warehouse location dimen- sion may contain the same attributes. A hierarchy can be deﬁned by specifying the total ordering among these attributes at the schema level such as street < city < province or state < country. 2. Speciﬁcation of a portion of a hierarchy by explicit data grouping: This is essen- tially the manual deﬁnition of a portion of a concept hierarchy. In a large database, it is unrealistic to deﬁne an entire concept hierarchy by explicit value enumera- tion. On the contrary, we can easily specify explicit groupings for a small portion of intermediate-level data. For example, after specifying that province and country 118 Chapter 3 Data Preprocessing form a hierarchy at the schema level, a user could deﬁne some intermediate levels manually, such as “{Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba} ⊂prairies Canada” and “{British Columbia, prairies Canada} ⊂Western Canada.” 3. Speciﬁcation of a set of attributes, but not of their partial ordering: A user may specify a set of attributes forming a concept hierarchy, but omit to explicitly state their partial ordering. The system can then try to automatically generate the attribute ordering so as to construct a meaningful concept hierarchy. “Without knowledge of data semantics, how can a hierarchical ordering for an arbitrary set of nominal attributes be found?” Consider the observation that since higher-level concepts generally cover several subordinate lower-level concepts, an attribute deﬁning a high concept level (e.g., country) will usually contain a smaller number of distinct values than an attribute deﬁning a lower concept level (e.g., street). Based on this observation, a concept hierarchy can be automatically gener- ated based on the number of distinct values per attribute in the given attribute set. The attribute with the most distinct values is placed at the lowest hierarchy level. The lower the number of distinct values an attribute has, the higher it is in the gener- ated concept hierarchy. This heuristic rule works well in many cases. Some local-level swapping or adjustments may be applied by users or experts, when necessary, after examination of the generated hierarchy. Let’s examine an example of this third method. Example 3.7 Concept hierarchy generation based on the number of distinct values per attribute. Suppose a user selects a set of location-oriented attributes—street, country, province or state, and city—from the AllElectronics database, but does not specify the hierarchical ordering among the attributes. A concept hierarchy for location can be generated automatically, as illustrated in Figure 3.13. First, sort the attributes in ascending order based on the number of dis- tinct values in each attribute. This results in the following (where the number of distinct values per attribute is shown in parentheses): country (15), province or state (365), city (3567), and street (674,339). Second, generate the hierarchy from the top down accord- ing to the sorted order, with the ﬁrst attribute at the top level and the last attribute at the bottom level. Finally, the user can examine the generated hierarchy, and when necessary, modify it to reﬂect desired semantic relationships among the attributes. In this example, it is obvious that there is no need to modify the generated hierarchy. Note that this heuristic rule is not foolproof. For example, a time dimension in a database may contain 20 distinct years, 12 distinct months, and 7 distinct days of the week. However, this does not suggest that the time hierarchy should be “year < month < days of the week,” with days of the week at the top of the hierarchy. 4. Speciﬁcation of only a partial set of attributes: Sometimes a user can be careless when deﬁning a hierarchy, or have only a vague idea about what should be included in a hierarchy. Consequently, the user may have included only a small subset of the 3.5 Data Transformation and Data Discretization 119 country 15 distinct values province_or_state city street 365 distinct values 3567 distinct values 674,339 distinct values Figure 3.13 Automatic generation of a schema concept hierarchy based on the number of distinct attribute values. relevant attributes in the hierarchy speciﬁcation. For example, instead of including all of the hierarchically relevant attributes for location, the user may have speciﬁed only street and city. To handle such partially speciﬁed hierarchies, it is important to embed data semantics in the database schema so that attributes with tight semantic connections can be pinned together. In this way, the speciﬁcation of one attribute may trigger a whole group of semantically tightly linked attributes to be “dragged in” to form a complete hierarchy. Users, however, should have the option to override this feature, as necessary. Example 3.8 Concept hierarchy generation using prespeciﬁed semantic connections. Suppose that a data mining expert (serving as an administrator) has pinned together the ﬁve attri- butes number, street, city, province or state, and country, because they are closely linked semantically regarding the notion of location. If a user were to specify only the attribute city for a hierarchy deﬁning location, the system can automatically drag in all ﬁve seman- tically related attributes to form a hierarchy. The user may choose to drop any of these attributes (e.g., number and street) from the hierarchy, keeping city as the lowest conceptual level. In summary, information at the schema level and on attribute–value counts can be used to generate concept hierarchies for nominal data. Transforming nominal data with the use of concept hierarchies allows higher-level knowledge patterns to be found. It allows mining at multiple levels of abstraction, which is a common requirement for data mining applications. 120 Chapter 3 Data Preprocessing 3.6 Summary Data quality is deﬁned in terms of accuracy, completeness, consistency, timeliness, believability, and interpretabilty. These qualities are assessed based on the intended use of the data. Data cleaning routines attempt to ﬁll in missing values, smooth out noise while identifying outliers, and correct inconsistencies in the data. Data cleaning is usually performed as an iterative two-step process consisting of discrepancy detection and data transformation. Data integration combines data from multiple sources to form a coherent data store. The resolution of semantic heterogeneity, metadata, correlation analysis, tuple duplication detection, and data conﬂict detection contribute to smooth data integration. Data reduction techniques obtain a reduced representation of the data while mini- mizing the loss of information content. These include methods of dimensionality reduction, numerosity reduction, and data compression. Dimensionality reduction reduces the number of random variables or attributes under consideration. Methods include wavelet transforms, principal components analysis, attribute subset selection, and attribute creation. Numerosity reduction methods use parametric or nonparat- metric models to obtain smaller representations of the original data. Parametric models store only the model parameters instead of the actual data. Examples include regression and log-linear models. Nonparamteric methods include his- tograms, clustering, sampling, and data cube aggregation. Data compression meth- ods apply transformations to obtain a reduced or “compressed” representation of the original data. The data reduction is lossless if the original data can be recon- structed from the compressed data without any loss of information; otherwise, it is lossy. Data transformation routines convert the data into appropriate forms for min- ing. For example, in normalization, attribute data are scaled so as to fall within a small range such as 0.0 to 1.0. Other examples are data discretization and concept hierarchy generation. Data discretization transforms numeric data by mapping values to interval or con- cept labels. Such methods can be used to automatically generate concept hierarchies for the data, which allows for mining at multiple levels of granularity. Discretiza- tion techniques include binning, histogram analysis, cluster analysis, decision tree analysis, and correlation analysis. For nominal data, concept hierarchies may be generated based on schema deﬁnitions as well as the number of distinct values per attribute. Although numerous methods of data preprocessing have been developed, data pre- processing remains an active area of research, due to the huge amount of inconsistent or dirty data and the complexity of the problem. 3.7 Exercises 121 3.7 Exercises 3.1 Data quality can be assessed in terms of several issues, including accuracy, completeness, and consistency. For each of the above three issues, discuss how data quality assess- ment can depend on the intended use of the data, giving examples. Propose two other dimensions of data quality. 3.2 In real-world data, tuples with missing values for some attributes are a common occurrence. Describe various methods for handling this problem. 3.3 Exercise 2.2 gave the following data (in increasing order) for the attribute age: 13, 15, 16, 16, 19, 20, 20, 21, 22, 22, 25, 25, 25, 25, 30, 33, 33, 35, 35, 35, 35, 36, 40, 45, 46, 52, 70. (a) Use smoothing by bin means to smooth these data, using a bin depth of 3. Illustrate your steps. Comment on the effect of this technique for the given data. (b) How might you determine outliers in the data? (c) What other methods are there for data smoothing? 3.4 Discuss issues to consider during data integration. 3.5 What are the value ranges of the following normalization methods? (a) min-max normalization (b) z-score normalization (c) z-score normalization using the mean absolute deviation instead of standard devia- tion (d) normalization by decimal scaling 3.6 Use these methods to normalize the following group of data: 200,300,400,600,1000 (a) min-max normalization by setting min = 0 and max = 1 (b) z-score normalization (c) z-score normalization using the mean absolute deviation instead of standard devia- tion (d) normalization by decimal scaling 3.7 Using the data for age given in Exercise 3.3, answer the following: (a) Use min-max normalization to transform the value 35 for age onto the range [0.0,1.0]. (b) Use z-score normalization to transform the value 35 for age, where the standard deviation of age is 12.94 years. (c) Use normalization by decimal scaling to transform the value 35 for age. (d) Comment on which method you would prefer to use for the given data, giving reasons as to why. 122 Chapter 3 Data Preprocessing 3.8 Using the data for age and body fat given in Exercise 2.4, answer the following: (a) Normalize the two attributes based on z-score normalization. (b) Calculate the correlation coefﬁcient (Pearson’s product moment coefﬁcient). Are these two attributes positively or negatively correlated? Compute their covariance. 3.9 Suppose a group of 12 sales price records has been sorted as follows: 5,10,11,13,15,35,50,55,72,92,204,215. Partition them into three bins by each of the following methods: (a) equal-frequency (equal-depth) partitioning (b) equal-width partitioning (c) clustering 3.10 Use a ﬂowchart to summarize the following procedures for attribute subset selection: (a) stepwise forward selection (b) stepwise backward elimination (c) a combination of forward selection and backward elimination 3.11 Using the data for age given in Exercise 3.3, (a) Plot an equal-width histogram of width 10. (b) Sketch examples of each of the following sampling techniques: SRSWOR, SRSWR, cluster sampling, and stratiﬁed sampling. Use samples of size 5 and the strata “youth,” “middle-aged,” and “senior.” 3.12 ChiMerge [Ker92] is a supervised, bottom-up (i.e., merge-based) data discretization method. It relies on χ2 analysis: Adjacent intervals with the least χ2 values are merged together until the chosen stopping criterion satisﬁes. (a) Brieﬂy describe how ChiMerge works. (b) Take the IRIS data set, obtained from the University of California–Irvine Machine Learning Data Repository (www.ics.uci.edu/∼mlearn/MLRepository.html), as a data set to be discretized. Perform data discretization for each of the four numeric attributes using the ChiMerge method. (Let the stopping criteria be: max-interval = 6). You need to write a small program to do this to avoid clumsy numerical computation. Submit your simple analysis and your test results: split-points, ﬁnal intervals, and the documented source program. 3.13 Propose an algorithm, in pseudocode or in your favorite programming language, for the following: (a) The automatic generation of a concept hierarchy for nominal data based on the number of distinct values of attributes in the given schema. (b) The automatic generation of a concept hierarchy for numeric data based on the equal-width partitioning rule. 3.8 Bibliographic Notes 123 (c) The automatic generation of a concept hierarchy for numeric data based on the equal-frequency partitioning rule. 3.14 Robust data loading poses a challenge in database systems because the input data are often dirty. In many cases, an input record may miss multiple values; some records could be contaminated, with some data values out of range or of a different data type than expected. Work out an automated data cleaning and loading algorithm so that the erroneous data will be marked and contaminated data will not be mistakenly inserted into the database during data loading. 3.8 Bibliographic Notes Data preprocessing is discussed in a number of textbooks, including English [Eng99], Pyle [Pyl99], Loshin [Los01], Redman [Red01], and Dasu and Johnson [DJ03]. More speciﬁc references to individual preprocessing techniques are given later. For discussion regarding data quality, see Redman [Red92]; Wang, Storey, and Firth [WSF95]; Wand and Wang [WW96]; Ballou and Tayi [BT99]; and Olson [Ols03]. Potter’s Wheel (control.cx.berkely.edu/abc), the interactive data cleaning tool described in Section 3.2.3, is presented in Raman and Hellerstein [RH01]. An example of the devel- opment of declarative languages for the speciﬁcation of data transformation operators is given in Galhardas et al. [GFS+01]. The handling of missing attribute values is discussed in Friedman [Fri77]; Breiman, Friedman, Olshen, and Stone [BFOS84]; and Quinlan [Qui89]. Hua and Pei [HP07] presented a heuristic approach to cleaning disguised miss- ing data, where such data are captured when users falsely select default values on forms (e.g., “January 1” for birthdate) when they do not want to disclose personal information. A method for the detection of outlier or “garbage” patterns in a handwritten char- acter database is given in Guyon, Matic, and Vapnik [GMV96]. Binning and data normalization are treated in many texts, including Kennedy et al. [KLV+98], Weiss and Indurkhya [WI98], and Pyle [Pyl99]. Systems that include attribute (or feature) construction include BACON by Langley, Simon, Bradshaw, and Zytkow [LSBZ87]; Stagger by Schlimmer [Sch86]; FRINGE by Pagallo [Pag89]; and AQ17-DCI by Bloe- dorn and Michalski [BM98]. Attribute construction is also described in Liu and Motoda [LM98a, LM98b]. Dasu et al. built a BELLMAN system and proposed a set of interesting methods for building a data quality browser by mining database structures [DJMS02]. A good survey of data reduction techniques can be found in Barbar´a et al. [BDF+97]. For algorithms on data cubes and their precomputation, see Sarawagi and Stonebraker [SS94]; Agarwal et al. [AAD+96]; Harinarayan, Rajaraman, and Ullman [HRU96]; Ross and Srivastava [RS97]; and Zhao, Deshpande, and Naughton [ZDN97]. Attribute sub- set selection (or feature subset selection) is described in many texts such as Neter, Kutner, Nachtsheim, and Wasserman [NKNW96]; Dash and Liu [DL97]; and Liu and Motoda [LM98a, LM98b]. A combination forward selection and backward elimination method 124 Chapter 3 Data Preprocessing was proposed in Siedlecki and Sklansky [SS88]. A wrapper approach to attribute selec- tion is described in Kohavi and John [KJ97]. Unsupervised attribute subset selection is described in Dash, Liu, and Yao [DLY97]. For a description of wavelets for dimensionality reduction, see Press, Teukolosky, Vet- terling, and Flannery [PTVF07]. A general account of wavelets can be found in Hubbard [Hub96]. For a list of wavelet software packages, see Bruce, Donoho, and Gao [BDG96]. Daubechies transforms are described in Daubechies [Dau92]. The book by Press et al. [PTVF07] includes an introduction to singular value decomposition for principal com- ponents analysis. Routines for PCA are included in most statistical software packages such as SAS (www.sas.com/SASHome.html). An introduction to regression and log-linear models can be found in several textbooks such as James [Jam85]; Dobson [Dob90]; Johnson and Wichern [JW92]; Devore [Dev95]; and Neter, Kutner, Nachtsheim, and Wasserman [NKNW96]. For log- linear models (known as multiplicative models in the computer science literature), see Pearl [Pea88]. For a general introduction to histograms, see Barbar´a et al. [BDF+97] and Devore and Peck [DP97]. For extensions of single-attribute histograms to multiple attributes, see Muralikrishna and DeWitt [MD88] and Poosala and Ioannidis [PI97]. Several references to clustering algorithms are given in Chapters 10 and 11 of this book, which are devoted to the topic. A survey of multidimensional indexing structures is given in Gaede and G¨unther [GG98]. The use of multidimensional index trees for data aggregation is discussed in Aoki [Aok98]. Index trees include R-trees (Guttman [Gut84]), quad-trees (Finkel and Bentley [FB74]), and their variations. For discussion on sampling and data mining, see Kivinen and Mannila [KM94] and John and Langley [JL96]. There are many methods for assessing attribute relevance. Each has its own bias. The information gain measure is biased toward attributes with many values. Many alterna- tives have been proposed, such as gain ratio (Quinlan [Qui93]), which considers the probability of each attribute value. Other relevance measures include the Gini index (Breiman, Friedman, Olshen, and Stone [BFOS84]), the