accuracy may not be appropriate?” In classiﬁcation prob- lems, it is commonly assumed that all tuples are uniquely classiﬁable, that is, that each training tuple can belong to only one class. Yet, owing to the wide diversity of data in large databases, it is not always reasonable to assume that all tuples are uniquely classi- ﬁable. Rather, it is more probable to assume that each tuple may belong to more than one class. How then can the accuracy of classiﬁers on large databases be measured? The accuracy measure is not appropriate, because it does not take into account the possibility of tuples belonging to more than one class. Rather than returning a class label, it is useful to return a probability class distri- bution. Accuracy measures may then use a second guess heuristic, whereby a class prediction is judged as correct if it agrees with the ﬁrst or second most probable class. Although this does take into consideration, to some degree, the nonunique classiﬁcation of tuples, it is not a complete solution. In addition to accuracy-based measures, classiﬁers can also be compared with respect to the following additional aspects: Speed: This refers to the computational costs involved in generating and using the given classiﬁer. Robustness: This is the ability of the classiﬁer to make correct predictions given noisy data or data with missing values. Robustness is typically assessed with a series of synthetic data sets representing increasing degrees of noise and missing values. Scalability: This refers to the ability to construct the classiﬁer efﬁciently given large amounts of data. Scalability is typically assessed with a series of data sets of increasing size. Interpretability: This refers to the level of understanding and insight that is provided by the classiﬁer or predictor. Interpretability is subjective and therefore more difﬁcult to assess. Decision trees and classiﬁcation rules can be easy to interpret, yet their interpretability may diminish the more they become complex. We discuss some work in this area, such as the extraction of classiﬁcation rules from a “black box” neural network classiﬁer called backpropagation, in Chapter 9. 370 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts Test set Training set Derive model Data Estimate accuracy Figure 8.17 Estimating accuracy with the holdout method. In summary, we have presented several evaluation measures. The accuracy measure works best when the data classes are fairly evenly distributed. Other measures, such as sensitivity (or recall), speciﬁcity, precision, F, and Fβ, are better suited to the class imbal- ance problem, where the main class of interest is rare. The remaining subsections focus on obtaining reliable classiﬁer accuracy estimates. 8.5.2 Holdout Method and Random Subsampling The holdout method is what we have alluded to so far in our discussions about accuracy. In this method, the given data are randomly partitioned into two independent sets, a training set and a test set. Typically, two-thirds of the data are allocated to the training set, and the remaining one-third is allocated to the test set. The training set is used to derive the model. The model’s accuracy is then estimated with the test set (Figure 8.17). The estimate is pessimistic because only a portion of the initial data is used to derive the model. Random subsampling is a variation of the holdout method in which the holdout method is repeated k times. The overall accuracy estimate is taken as the average of the accuracies obtained from each iteration. 8.5.3 Cross-Validation In k-fold cross-validation, the initial data are randomly partitioned into k mutually exclusive subsets or “folds,” D1, D2,..., Dk, each of approximately equal size. Training and testing is performed k times. In iteration i, partition Di is reserved as the test set, and the remaining partitions are collectively used to train the model. That is, in the ﬁrst iteration, subsets D2,..., Dk collectively serve as the training set to obtain a ﬁrst model, which is tested on D1; the second iteration is trained on subsets D1, D3,..., Dk and tested on D2; and so on. Unlike the holdout and random subsampling methods, here each sample is used the same number of times for training and once for testing. For classiﬁcation, the accuracy estimate is the overall number of correct classiﬁcations from the k iterations, divided by the total number of tuples in the initial data. 8.5 Model Evaluation and Selection 371 Leave-one-out is a special case of k-fold cross-validation where k is set to the number of initial tuples. That is, only one sample is “left out” at a time for the test set. In strat- iﬁed cross-validation, the folds are stratiﬁed so that the class distribution of the tuples in each fold is approximately the same as that in the initial data. In general, stratiﬁed 10-fold cross-validation is recommended for estimating accu- racy (even if computation power allows using more folds) due to its relatively low bias and variance. 8.5.4 Bootstrap Unlike the accuracy estimation methods just mentioned, the bootstrap method sam- ples the given training tuples uniformly with replacement. That is, each time a tuple is selected, it is equally likely to be selected again and re-added to the training set. For instance, imagine a machine that randomly selects tuples for our training set. In sam- pling with replacement, the machine is allowed to select the same tuple more than once. There are several bootstrap methods. A commonly used one is the .632 bootstrap, which works as follows. Suppose we are given a data set of d tuples. The data set is sampled d times, with replacement, resulting in a bootstrap sample or training set of d samples. It is very likely that some of the original data tuples will occur more than once in this sample. The data tuples that did not make it into the training set end up forming the test set. Suppose we were to try this out several times. As it turns out, on average, 63.2% of the original data tuples will end up in the bootstrap sample, and the remaining 36.8% will form the test set (hence, the name, .632 bootstrap). “Where does the ﬁgure, 63.2%, come from?” Each tuple has a probability of 1/d of being selected, so the probability of not being chosen is (1 −1/d). We have to select d times, so the probability that a tuple will not be chosen during this whole time is (1 −1/d)d. If d is large, the probability approaches e−1 = 0.368.7 Thus, 36.8% of tuples will not be selected for training and thereby end up in the test set, and the remaining 63.2% will form the training set. We can repeat the sampling procedure k times, where in each iteration, we use the current test set to obtain an accuracy estimate of the model obtained from the current bootstrap sample. The overall accuracy of the model, M, is then estimated as Acc(M) = 1 k k X i=1 (0.632 × Acc(Mi)test set + 0.368 × Acc(Mi)train set), (8.30) where Acc(Mi)test set is the accuracy of the model obtained with bootstrap sample i when it is applied to test set i. Acc(Mi)train set is the accuracy of the model obtained with boot- strap sample i when it is applied to the original set of data tuples. Bootstrapping tends to be overly optimistic. It works best with small data sets. 7e is the base of natural logarithms, that is, e = 2.718. 372 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts 8.5.5 Model Selection Using Statistical Tests of Signiﬁcance Suppose that we have generated two classiﬁcation models, M1 and M2, from our data. We have performed 10-fold cross-validation to obtain a mean error rate8 for each. How can we determine which model is best? It may seem intuitive to select the model with the lowest error rate; however, the mean error rates are just estimates of error on the true population of future data cases. There can be considerable variance between error rates within any given 10-fold cross-validation experiment. Although the mean error rates obtained for M1 and M2 may appear different, that difference may not be statistically signiﬁcant. What if any difference between the two may just be attributed to chance? This section addresses these questions. To determine if there is any “real” difference in the mean error rates of two models, we need to employ a test of statistical signiﬁcance. In addition, we want to obtain some conﬁdence limits for our mean error rates so that we can make statements like, “Any observed mean will not vary by ± two standard errors 95% of the time for future samples” or “One model is better than the other by a margin of error of ± 4%.” What do we need to perform the statistical test? Suppose that for each model, we did 10-fold cross-validation, say, 10 times, each time using a different 10-fold data par- titioning. Each partitioning is independently drawn. We can average the 10 error rates obtained each for M1 and M2, respectively, to obtain the mean error rate for each model. For a given model, the individual error rates calculated in the cross-validations may be considered as different, independent samples from a probability distribution. In gen- eral, they follow a t-distribution with k −1 degrees of freedom where, here, k = 10. (This distribution looks very similar to a normal, or Gaussian, distribution even though the functions deﬁning the two are quite different. Both are unimodal, symmetric, and bell- shaped.) This allows us to do hypothesis testing where the signiﬁcance test used is the t-test, or Student’s t-test. Our hypothesis is that the two models are the same, or in other words, that the difference in mean error rate between the two is zero. If we can reject this hypothesis (referred to as the null hypothesis), then we can conclude that the difference between the two models is statistically signiﬁcant, in which case we can select the model with the lower error rate. In data mining practice, we may often employ a single test set, that is, the same test set can be used for both M1 and M2. In such cases, we do a pairwise compari- son of the two models for each 10-fold cross-validation round. That is, for the ith round of 10-fold cross-validation, the same cross-validation partitioning is used to obtain an error rate for M1 and for M2. Let err(M1)i (or err(M2)i) be the error rate of model M1 (or M2) on round i. The error rates for M1 are averaged to obtain a mean error rate for M1, denoted err(M1). Similarly, we can obtain err(M2). The variance of the difference between the two models is denoted var(M1 −M2). The t-test computes the t-statistic with k −1 degrees of freedom for k samples. In our example we have k = 10 since, here, the k samples are our error rates obtained from ten 10-fold cross-validations for each 8Recall that the error rate of a model, M, is 1 −accuracy(M). 8.5 Model Evaluation and Selection 373 model. The t-statistic for pairwise comparison is computed as follows: t = err(M1) −err(M2) p var(M1 −M2)/k , (8.31) where var(M1 −M2) = 1 k k X i=1 [err(M1)i −err(M2)i −(err(M1) −err(M2))]2 . (8.32) To determine whether M1 and M2 are signiﬁcantly different, we compute t and select a signiﬁcance level, sig. In practice, a signiﬁcance level of 5% or 1% is typically used. We then consult a table for the t-distribution, available in standard textbooks on statistics. This table is usually shown arranged by degrees of freedom as rows and signiﬁcance levels as columns. Suppose we want to ascertain whether the difference between M1 and M2 is signiﬁcantly different for 95% of the population, that is, sig = 5% or 0.05. We need to ﬁnd the t-distribution value corresponding to k −1 degrees of freedom (or 9 degrees of freedom for our example) from the table. However, because the t-distribution is symmetric, typically only the upper percentage points of the distribution are shown. Therefore, we look up the table value for z = sig/2, which in this case is 0.025, where z is also referred to as a conﬁdence limit. If t > z or t < −z, then our value of t lies in the rejection region, within the distribution’s tails. This means that we can reject the null hypothesis that the means of M1 and M2 are the same and conclude that there is a statistically signiﬁcant difference between the two models. Otherwise, if we cannot reject the null hypothesis, we conclude that any difference between M1 and M2 can be attributed to chance. If two test sets are available instead of a single test set, then a nonpaired version of the t-test is used, where the variance between the means of the two models is estimated as var(M1 −M2) = s var(M1) k1 + var(M2) k2 , (8.33) and k1 and k2 are the number of cross-validation samples (in our case, 10-fold cross- validation rounds) used for M1 and M2, respectively. This is also known as the two sample t-test.9 When consulting the table of t-distribution, the number of degrees of freedom used is taken as the minimum number of degrees of the two models. 8.5.6 Comparing Classiﬁers Based on Cost–Beneﬁt and ROC Curves The true positives, true negatives, false positives, and false negatives are also useful in assessing the costs and beneﬁts (or risks and gains) associated with a classiﬁcation 9This test was used in sampling cubes for OLAP-based mining in Chapter 5. 374 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts model. The cost associated with a false negative (such as incorrectly predicting that a cancerous patient is not cancerous) is far greater than those of a false positive (incorrectly yet conservatively labeling a noncancerous patient as cancerous). In such cases, we can outweigh one type of error over another by assigning a different cost to each. These costs may consider the danger to the patient, ﬁnancial costs of resulting therapies, and other hospital costs. Similarly, the beneﬁts associated with a true positive decision may be different than those of a true negative. Up to now, to compute classiﬁer accuracy, we have assumed equal costs and essentially divided the sum of true positives and true negatives by the total number of test tuples. Alternatively, we can incorporate costs and beneﬁts by instead computing the average cost (or beneﬁt) per decision. Other applications involving cost–beneﬁt analysis include loan application decisions and target marketing mailouts. For example, the cost of loan- ing to a defaulter greatly exceeds that of the lost business incurred by denying a loan to a nondefaulter. Similarly, in an application that tries to identify households that are likely to respond to mailouts of certain promotional material, the cost of mailouts to numer- ous households that do not respond may outweigh the cost of lost business from not mailing to households that would have responded. Other costs to consider in the overall analysis include the costs to collect the data and to develop the classiﬁcation tool. Receiver operating characteristic curves are a useful visual tool for comparing two classiﬁcation models. ROC curves come from signal detection theory that was deve- loped during World War II for the analysis of radar images. An ROC curve for a given model shows the trade-off between the true positive rate (TPR) and the false positive rate (FPR).10 Given a test set and a model, TPR is the proportion of positive (or “yes”) tuples that are correctly labeled by the model; FPR is the proportion of negative (or “no”) tuples that are mislabeled as positive. Given that TP, FP, P, and N are the number of true positive, false positive, positive, and negative tuples, respectively, from Section 8.5.1 we know that TPR = TP P , which is sensitivity. Furthermore, FPR = FP N , which is 1 −speciﬁcity. For a two-class problem, an ROC curve allows us to visualize the trade-off between the rate at which the model can accurately recognize positive cases versus the rate at which it mistakenly identiﬁes negative cases as positive for different portions of the test set. Any increase in TPR occurs at the cost of an increase in FPR. The area under the ROC curve is a measure of the accuracy of the model. To plot an ROC curve for a given classiﬁcation model, M, the model must be able to return a probability of the predicted class for each test tuple. With this information, we rank and sort the tuples so that the tuple that is most likely to belong to the positive or “yes” class appears at the top of the list, and the tuple that is least likely to belong to the positive class lands at the bottom of the list. Na¨ıve Bayesian (Section 8.3) and backpropa- gation (Section 9.2) classiﬁers return a class probability distribution for each prediction and, therefore, are appropriate, although other classiﬁers, such as decision tree classiﬁers (Section 8.2), can easily be modiﬁed to return class probability predictions. Let the value 10TPR and FPR are the two operating characteristics being compared. 8.5 Model Evaluation and Selection 375 that a probabilistic classiﬁer returns for a given tuple X be f (X) →[0,1]. For a binary problem, a threshold t is typically selected so that tuples where f (X) ≥t are considered positive and all the other tuples are considered negative. Note that the number of true positives and the number of false positives are both functions of t, so that we could write TP(t) and FP(t). Both are monotonic descending functions. We ﬁrst describe the general idea behind plotting an ROC curve, and then follow up with an example. The vertical axis of an ROC curve represents TPR. The horizontal axis represents FPR. To plot an ROC curve for M, we begin as follows. Starting at the bottom left corner (where TPR = FPR = 0), we check the tuple’s actual class label at the top of the list. If we have a true positive (i.e., a positive tuple that was correctly classiﬁed), then TP and thus TPR increase. On the graph, we move up and plot a point. If, instead, the model classiﬁes a negative tuple as positive, we have a false positive, and so both FP and FPR increase. On the graph, we move right and plot a point. This process is repeated for each of the test tuples in ranked order, each time moving up on the graph for a true positive or toward the right for a false positive. Example 8.11 Plotting an ROC curve. Figure 8.18 shows the probability value (column 3) returned by a probabilistic classiﬁer for each of the 10 tuples in a test set, sorted by decreasing probability order. Column 1 is merely a tuple identiﬁcation number, which aids in our explanation. Column 2 is the actual class label of the tuple. There are ﬁve positive tuples and ﬁve negative tuples, thus P = 5 and N = 5. As we examine the known class label of each tuple, we can determine the values of the remaining columns, TP, FP, TN, FN, TPR, and FPR. We start with tuple 1, which has the highest probability score, and take that score as our threshold, that is, t = 0.9. Thus, the classiﬁer considers tuple 1 to be positive, and all the other tuples are considered negative. Since the actual class label of tuple 1 is positive, we have a true positive, hence TP = 1 and FP = 0. Among the Tuple # Class Prob. TP FP TN FN TPR FPR 1 P 0.90 1 0 5 4 0.2 0 2 P 0.80 2 0 5 3 0.4 0 3 N 0.70 2 1 4 3 0.4 0.2 4 P 0.60 3 1 4 2 0.6 0.2 5 P 0.55 4 1 4 1 0.8 0.2 6 N 0.54 4 2 3 1 0.8 0.4 7 N 0.53 4 3 2 1 0.8 0.6 8 N 0.51 4 4 1 1 0.8 0.8 9 P 0.50 5 4 0 1 1.0 0.8 10 N 0.40 5 5 0 0 1.0 1.0 Figure 8.18 Tuples sorted by decreasing score, where the score is the value returned by a probabilistic classiﬁer. 376 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts 1.0 Convex hull ROC Random guessing 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 0 0.2 0.4 False positive rate (FPR) True positive rate (TPR) 0.6 0.8 1.0 Figure 8.19 ROC curve for the data in Figure 8.18. remaining nine tuples, which are all classiﬁed as negative, ﬁve actually are negative (thus, TN = 5). The remaining four are all actually positive, thus, FN = 4. We can therefore compute TPR = TP P = 1 5 = 0.2, while FPR = 0. Thus, we have the point (0.2,0) for the ROC curve. Next, threshold t is set to 0.8, the probability value for tuple 2, so this tuple is now also considered positive, while tuples 3 through 10 are considered negative. The actual class label of tuple 2 is positive, thus now TP = 2. The rest of the row can easily be computed, resulting in the point (0.4,0). Next, we examine the class label of tuple 3 and let t be 0.7, the probability value returned by the classiﬁer for that tuple. Thus, tuple 3 is considered positive, yet its actual label is negative, and so it is a false positive. Thus, TP stays the same and FP increments so that FP = 1. The rest of the values in the row can also be easily computed, yielding the point (0.4,0.2). The resulting ROC graph, from examining each tuple, is the jagged line shown in Figure 8.19. There are many methods to obtain a curve out of these points, the most common of which is to use a convex hull. The plot also shows a diagonal line where for every true positive of such a model, we are just as likely to encounter a false positive. For comparison, this line represents random guessing. Figure 8.20 shows the ROC curves of two classiﬁcation models. The diagonal line representing random guessing is also shown. Thus, the closer the ROC curve of a model is to the diagonal line, the less accurate the model. If the model is really good, initially we are more likely to encounter true positives as we move down the ranked list. Thus, 8.6 Techniques to Improve Classiﬁcation Accuracy 377 M1 M2 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 True positive rate False positive rate Figure 8.20 ROC curves of two classiﬁcation models, M1 and M2. The diagonal shows where, for every true positive, we are equally likely to encounter a false positive. The closer an ROC curve is to the diagonal line, the less accurate the model is. Thus, M1 is more accurate here. the curve moves steeply up from zero. Later, as we start to encounter fewer and fewer true positives, and more and more false positives, the curve eases off and becomes more horizontal. To assess the accuracy of a model, we can measure the area under the curve. Several software packages are able to perform such calculation. The closer the area is to 0.5, the less accurate the corresponding model is. A model with perfect accuracy will have an area of 1.0. 8.6 Techniques to Improve Classiﬁcation Accuracy In this section, you will learn some tricks for increasing classiﬁcation accuracy. We focus on ensemble methods. An ensemble for classiﬁcation is a composite model, made up of a combination of classiﬁers. The individual classiﬁers vote, and a class label prediction is returned by the ensemble based on the collection of votes. Ensembles tend to be more accurate than their component classiﬁers. We start off in Section 8.6.1 by introducing ensemble methods in general. Bagging (Section 8.6.2), boosting (Section 8.6.3), and random forests (Section 8.6.4) are popular ensemble methods. Traditional learning models assume that the data classes are well distributed. In many real-world data domains, however, the data are class-imbalanced, where the main class of interest is represented by only a few tuples. This is known as the class 378 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts imbalance problem. We also study techniques for improving the classiﬁcation accuracy of class-imbalanced data. These are presented in Section 8.6.5. 8.6.1 Introducing Ensemble Methods Bagging, boosting, and random forests are examples of ensemble methods (Figure 8.21). An ensemble combines a series of k learned models (or base classiﬁers), M1, M2,..., Mk, with the aim of creating an improved composite classiﬁcation model, M∗. A given data set, D, is used to create k training sets, D1, D2,..., Dk, where Di (1 ≤i ≤k −1) is used to generate classiﬁer Mi. Given a new data tuple to classify, the base classiﬁers each vote by returning a class prediction. The ensemble returns a class prediction based on the votes of the base classiﬁers. An ensemble tends to be more accurate than its base classiﬁers. For example, con- sider an ensemble that performs majority voting. That is, given a tuple X to classify, it collects the class label predictions returned from the base classiﬁers and outputs the class in majority. The base classiﬁers may make mistakes, but the ensemble will misclassify X only if over half of the base classiﬁers are in error. Ensembles yield better results when there is signiﬁcant diversity among the models. That is, ideally, there is little correla- tion among classiﬁers. The classiﬁers should also perform better than random guessing. Each base classiﬁer can be allocated to a different CPU and so ensemble methods are parallelizable. To help illustrate the power of an ensemble, consider a simple two-class problem described by two attributes, x1 and x2. The problem has a linear decision boundary. Figure 8.22(a) shows the decision boundary of a decision tree classiﬁer on the problem. Figure 8.22(b) shows the decision boundary of an ensemble of decision tree classiﬁers on the same problem. Although the ensemble’s decision boundary is still piecewise constant, it has a ﬁner resolution and is better than that of a single tree. M1 Data, D M2 • • Mk Combine votes New data tuple Prediction D1 D2 Dk Figure 8.21 Increasing classiﬁer accuracy: Ensemble methods generate a set of classiﬁcation models, M1, M2,..., Mk. Given a new data tuple to classify, each classiﬁer “votes” for the class label of that tuple. The ensemble combines the votes to return a class prediction. 8.6 Techniques to Improve Classiﬁcation Accuracy 379 1.0 0.8 0.6 x2 x1 (a) 0.4 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.0 0.8 0.6 x2 x1 (b) 0.4 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Figure 8.22 Decision boundary by (a) a single decision tree and (b) an ensemble of decision trees for a linearly separable problem (i.e., where the actual decision boundary is a straight line). The decision tree struggles with approximating a linear boundary. The decision boundary of the ensemble is closer to the true boundary. Source: From Seni and Elder [SE10]. c⃝2010 Morgan & Claypool Publishers; used with permission. 8.6.2 Bagging We now take an intuitive look at how bagging works as a method of increasing accuracy. Suppose that you are a patient and would like to have a diagnosis made based on your symptoms. Instead of asking one doctor, you may choose to ask several. If a certain diagnosis occurs more than any other, you may choose this as the ﬁnal or best diagnosis. That is, the ﬁnal diagnosis is made based on a majority vote, where each doctor gets an equal vote. Now replace each doctor by a classiﬁer, and you have the basic idea behind bagging. Intuitively, a majority vote made by a large group of doctors may be more reliable than a majority vote made by a small group. Given a set, D, of d tuples, bagging works as follows. For iteration i(i = 1, 2,..., k), a training set, Di, of d tuples is sampled with replacement from the original set of tuples, D. Note that the term bagging stands for bootstrap aggregation. Each training set is a bootstrap sample, as described in Section 8.5.4. Because sampling with replace- ment is used, some of the original tuples of D may not be included in Di, whereas others may occur more than once. A classiﬁer model, Mi, is learned for each training set, Di. To classify an unknown tuple, X, each classiﬁer, Mi, returns its class prediction, which counts as one vote. The bagged classiﬁer, M∗, counts the votes and assigns the class with the most votes to X. Bagging can be applied to the prediction of continuous values by taking the average value of each prediction for a given test tuple. The algorithm is summarized in Figure 8.23. The bagged classiﬁer often has signiﬁcantly greater accuracy than a single classiﬁer derived from D, the original training data. It will not be considerably worse and is more 380 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts Algorithm: Bagging. The bagging algorithm—create an ensemble of classiﬁcation models for a learning scheme where each model gives an equally weighted prediction. Input: D, a set of d training tuples; k, the number of models in the ensemble; a classiﬁcation learning scheme (decision tree algorithm, na¨ıve Bayesian, etc.). Output: The ensemble—a composite model, M∗. Method: (1) for i = 1 to k do // create k models: (2) create bootstrap sample, Di, by sampling D with replacement; (3) use Di and the learning scheme to derive a model, Mi; (4) endfor To use the ensemble to classify a tuple, X: let each of the k models classify X and return the majority vote; Figure 8.23 Bagging. robust to the effects of noisy data and overﬁtting. The increased accuracy occurs because the composite model reduces the variance of the individual classiﬁers. 8.6.3 Boosting and AdaBoost We now look at the ensemble method of boosting. As in the previous section, suppose that as a patient, you have certain symptoms. Instead of consulting one doctor, you choose to consult several. Suppose you assign weights to the value or worth of each doc- tor’s diagnosis, based on the accuracies of previous diagnoses they have made. The ﬁnal diagnosis is then a combination of the weighted diagnoses. This is the essence behind boosting. In boosting, weights are also assigned to each training tuple. A series of k classiﬁers is iteratively learned. After a classiﬁer, Mi, is learned, the weights are updated to allow the subsequent classiﬁer, Mi+1, to “pay more attention” to the training tuples that were mis- classiﬁed by Mi. The ﬁnal boosted classiﬁer, M∗, combines the votes of each individual classiﬁer, where the weight of each classiﬁer’s vote is a function of its accuracy. AdaBoost (short for Adaptive Boosting) is a popular boosting algorithm. Suppose we want to boost the accuracy of a learning method. We are given D, a data set of d class-labeled tuples, (X1,y1),(X2,y2),...,(Xd,yd), where yi is the class label of tuple Xi. Initially, AdaBoost assigns each training tuple an equal weight of 1/d. Generating k classiﬁers for the ensemble requires k rounds through the rest of the algorithm. In round i, the tuples from D are sampled to form a training set, Di, of size d. Sampling 8.6 Techniques to Improve Classiﬁcation Accuracy 381 with replacement is used—the same tuple may be selected more than once. Each tuple’s chance of being selected is based on its weight. A classiﬁer model, Mi, is derived from the training tuples of Di. Its error is then calculated using Di as a test set. The weights of the training tuples are then adjusted according to how they were classiﬁed. If a tuple was incorrectly classiﬁed, its weight is increased. If a tuple was correctly classiﬁed, its weight is decreased. A tuple’s weight reﬂects how difﬁcult it is to classify— the higher the weight, the more often it has been misclassiﬁed. These weights will be used to generate the training samples for the classiﬁer of the next round. The basic idea is that when we build a classiﬁer, we want it to focus more on the misclassiﬁed tuples of the previous round. Some classiﬁers may be better at classifying some “difﬁcult” tuples than others. In this way, we build a series of classiﬁers that complement each other. The algorithm is summarized in Figure 8.24. Now, let’s look at some of the math that’s involved in the algorithm. To compute the error rate of model Mi, we sum the weights of each of the tuples in Di that Mi misclassiﬁed. That is, error(Mi) = d X j=1 wj × err(Xj), (8.34) where err(Xj) is the misclassiﬁcation error of tuple Xj: If the tuple was misclassiﬁed, then err(Xj) is 1; otherwise, it is 0. If the performance of classiﬁer Mi is so poor that its error exceeds 0.5, then we abandon it. Instead, we try again by generating a new Di training set, from which we derive a new Mi. The error rate of Mi affects how the weights of the training tuples are updated. If a tuple in round i was correctly classiﬁed, its weight is multiplied by error(Mi)/ (1 −error(Mi)). Once the weights of all the correctly classiﬁed tuples are updated, the weights for all tuples (including the misclassiﬁed ones) are normalized so that their sum remains the same as it was before. To normalize a weight, we multiply it by the sum of the old weights, divided by the sum of the new weights. As a result, the weights of mis- classiﬁed tuples are increased and the weights of correctly classiﬁed tuples are decreased, as described before. “Once boosting is complete, how is the ensemble of classiﬁers used to predict the class label of a tuple, X?” Unlike bagging, where each classiﬁer was assigned an equal vote, boosting assigns a weight to each classiﬁer’s vote, based on how well the classiﬁer performed. The lower a classiﬁer’s error rate, the more accurate it is, and therefore, the higher its weight for voting should be. The weight of classiﬁer Mi’s vote is log 1 −error(Mi) error(Mi) . (8.35) For each class, c, we sum the weights of each classiﬁer that assigned class c to X. The class with the highest sum is the “winner” and is returned as the class prediction for tuple X. “How does boosting compare with bagging?” Because of the way boosting focuses on the misclassiﬁed tuples, it risks overﬁtting the resulting composite model to such data. 382 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts Algorithm: AdaBoost. A boosting algorithm—create an ensemble of classiﬁers. Each one gives a weighted vote. Input: D, a set of d class-labeled training tuples; k, the number of rounds (one classiﬁer is generated per round); a classiﬁcation learning scheme. Output: A composite model. Method: (1) initialize the weight of each tuple in D to 1/d; (2) for i = 1 to k do // for each round: (3) sample D with replacement according to the tuple weights to obtain Di; (4) use training set Di to derive a model, Mi; (5) compute error(Mi), the error rate of Mi (Eq. 8.34) (6) if error(Mi) > 0.5 then (7) go back to step 3 and try again; (8) endif (9) for each tuple in Di that was correctly classiﬁed do (10) multiply the weight of the tuple by error(Mi)/(1 −error(Mi)); // update weights (11) normalize the weight of each tuple; (12) endfor To use the ensemble to classify tuple, X: (1) initialize weight of each class to 0; (2) for i = 1 to k do // for each classiﬁer: (3) wi = log 1−error(Mi) error(Mi) ; // weight of the classiﬁer’s vote (4) c = Mi(X); // get class prediction for X from Mi (5) add wi to weight for class c (6) endfor (7) return the class with the largest weight; Figure 8.24 AdaBoost, a boosting algorithm. Therefore, sometimes the resulting “boosted” model may be less accurate than a single model derived from the same data. Bagging is less susceptible to model overﬁtting. While both can signiﬁcantly improve accuracy in comparison to a single model, boosting tends to achieve greater accuracy. 8.6.4 Random Forests We now present another ensemble method called random forests. Imagine that each of the classiﬁers in the ensemble is a decision tree classiﬁer so that the collection of classiﬁers 8.6 Techniques to Improve Classiﬁcation Accuracy 383 is a “forest.” The individual decision trees are generated using a random selection of attributes at each node to determine the split. More formally, each tree depends on the values of a random vector sampled independently and with the same distribution for all trees in the forest. During classiﬁcation, each tree votes and the most popular class is returned. Random forests can be built using bagging (Section 8.6.2) in tandem with random attribute selection. A training set, D, of d tuples is given. The general procedure to gen- erate k decision trees for the ensemble is as follows. For each iteration, i(i = 1, 2,..., k), a training set, Di, of d tuples is sampled with replacement from D. That is, each Di is a bootstrap sample of D (Section 8.5.4), so that some tuples may occur more than once in Di, while others may be excluded. Let F be the number of attributes to be used to determine the split at each node, where F is much smaller than the number of avail- able attributes. To construct a decision tree classiﬁer, Mi, randomly select, at each node, F attributes as candidates for the split at the node. The CART methodology is used to grow the trees. The trees are grown to maximum size and are not pruned. Random forests formed this way, with random input selection, are called Forest-RI. Another form of random forest, called Forest-RC, uses random linear combinations of the input attributes. Instead of randomly selecting a subset of the attributes, it cre- ates new attributes (or features) that are a linear combination of the existing attributes. That is, an attribute is generated by specifying L, the number of original attributes to be combined. At a given node, L attributes are randomly selected and added together with coefﬁcients that are uniform random numbers on [−1,1]. F linear combinations are generated, and a search is made over these for the best split. This form of random forest is useful when there are only a few attributes available, so as to reduce the correlation between individual classiﬁers. Random forests are comparable in accuracy to AdaBoost, yet are more robust to errors and outliers. The generalization error for a forest converges as long as the num- ber of trees in the forest is large. Thus, overﬁtting is not a problem. The accuracy of a random forest depends on the strength of the individual classiﬁers and a measure of the dependence between them. The ideal is to maintain the strength of individual classiﬁers without increasing their correlation. Random forests are insensitive to the number of attributes selected for consideration at each split. Typically, up to log2d + 1 are chosen. (An interesting empirical observation was that using a single random input attribute may result in good accuracy that is often higher than when using several attributes.) Because random forests consider many fewer attributes for each split, they are efﬁcient on very large databases. They can be faster than either bagging or boosting. Random forests give internal estimates of variable importance. 8.6.5 Improving Classiﬁcation Accuracy of Class-Imbalanced Data In this section, we revisit the class imbalance problem. In particular, we study approaches to improving the classiﬁcation accuracy of class-imbalanced data. Given two-class data, the data are class-imbalanced if the main class of interest (the positive class) is represented by only a few tuples, while the majority of tuples represent the negative class. For multiclass-imbalanced data, the data distribution of each class 384 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts differs substantially where, again, the main class or classes of interest are rare. The class imbalance problem is closely related to cost-sensitive learning, wherein the costs of errors, per class, are not equal. In medical diagnosis, for example, it is much more costly to falsely diagnose a cancerous patient as healthy (a false negative) than to misdiagnose a healthy patient as having cancer (a false positive). A false negative error could lead to the loss of life and therefore is much more expensive than a false positive error. Other applications involving class-imbalanced data include fraud detection, the detection of oil spills from satellite radar images, and fault monitoring. Traditional classiﬁcation algorithms aim to minimize the number of errors made dur- ing classiﬁcation. They assume that the costs of false positive and false negative errors are equal. By assuming a balanced distribution of classes and equal error costs, they are therefore not suitable for class-imbalanced data. Earlier parts of this chapter pre- sented ways of addressing the class imbalance problem. Although the accuracy measure assumes that the cost of classes are equal, alternative evaluation metrics can be used that consider the different types of classiﬁcations. Section 8.5.1, for example, presented sensi- tivity or recall (the true positive rate) and speciﬁcity (the true negative rate), which help to assess how well a classiﬁer can predict the class label of imbalanced data. Additional relevant measures discussed include F1 and Fβ. Section 8.5.6 showed how ROC curves plot sensitivity versus 1 −speciﬁcity (i.e., the false positive rate). Such curves can provide insight when studying the performance of classiﬁers on class-imbalanced data. In this section, we look at general approaches for improving the classiﬁcation accu- racy of class-imbalanced data. These approaches include (1) oversampling, (2) under- sampling, (3) threshold moving, and (4) ensemble techniques. The ﬁrst three do not involve any changes to the construction of the classiﬁcation model. That is, oversam- pling and undersampling change the distribution of tuples in the training set; threshold moving affects how the model makes decisions when classifying new data. Ensemble methods follow the techniques described in Sections 8.6.2 through 8.6.4. For ease of explanation, we describe these general approaches with respect to the two-class imbal- ance data problem, where the higher-cost classes are rarer than the lower-cost classes. Both oversampling and undersampling change the training data distribution so that the rare (positive) class is well represented. Oversampling works by resampling the pos- itive tuples so that the resulting training set contains an equal number of positive and negative tuples. Undersampling works by decreasing the number of negative tuples. It randomly eliminates tuples from the majority (negative) class until there are an equal number of positive and negative tuples. Example 8.12 Oversampling and undersampling. Suppose the original training set contains 100 pos- itive and 1000 negative tuples. In oversampling, we replicate tuples of the rarer class to form a new training set containing 1000 positive tuples and 1000 negative tuples. In undersampling, we randomly eliminate negative tuples so that the new training set contains 100 positive tuples and 100 negative tuples. Several variations to oversampling and undersampling exist. They may vary, for instance, in how tuples are added or eliminated. For example, the SMOTE algorithm 8.7 Summary 385 uses oversampling where synthetic tuples are added, which are “close to” the given positive tuples in tuple space. The threshold-moving approach to the class imbalance problem does not involve any sampling. It applies to classiﬁers that, given an input tuple, return a continuous output value (just like in Section 8.5.6, where we discussed how to construct ROC curves). That is, for an input tuple, X, such a classiﬁer returns as output a mapping, f (X) →[0,1]. Rather than manipulating the training tuples, this method returns a clas- siﬁcation decision based on the output values. In the simplest approach, tuples for which f (X) ≥t, for some threshold, t, are considered positive, while all other tuples are con- sidered negative. Other approaches may involve manipulating the outputs by weighting. In general, threshold moving moves the threshold, t, so that the rare class tuples are eas- ier to classify (and hence, there is less chance of costly false negative errors). Examples of such classiﬁers include na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁers (Section 8.3) and neural network clas- siﬁers like backpropagation (Section 9.2). The threshold-moving method, although not as popular as over- and undersampling, is simple and has shown some success for the two-class-imbalanced data. Ensemble methods (Sections 8.6.2 through 8.6.4) have also been applied to the class imbalance problem. The individual classiﬁers making up the ensemble may include versions of the approaches described here such as oversampling and threshold moving. These methods work relatively well for the class imbalance problem on two-class tasks. Threshold-moving and ensemble methods were empirically observed to outper- form oversampling and undersampling. Threshold moving works well even on data sets that are extremely imbalanced. The class imbalance problem on multiclass tasks is much more difﬁcult, where oversampling and threshold moving are less effective. Although threshold-moving and ensemble methods show promise, ﬁnding a solution for the multiclass imbalance problem remains an area of future work. 8.7 Summary Classiﬁcation is a form of data analysis that extracts models describing data classes. A classiﬁer, or classiﬁcation model, predicts categorical labels (classes). Numeric pre- diction models continuous-valued functions. Classiﬁcation and numeric prediction are the two major types of prediction problems. Decision tree induction is a top-down recursive tree induction algorithm, which uses an attribute selection measure to select the attribute tested for each nonleaf node in the tree. ID3, C4.5, and CART are examples of such algorithms using different attribute selection measures. Tree pruning algorithms attempt to improve accuracy by removing tree branches reﬂecting noise in the data. Early decision tree algorithms typically assume that the data are memory resident. Several scalable algorithms, such as RainForest, have been proposed for scalable tree induction. Na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁcation is based on Bayes’ theorem of posterior probability. It assumes class-conditional independence—that the effect of an attribute value on a given class is independent of the values of the other attributes. 386 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts A rule-based classiﬁer uses a set of IF-THEN rules for classiﬁcation. Rules can be extracted from a decision tree. Rules may also be generated directly from training data using sequential covering algorithms. A confusion matrix can be used to evaluate a classiﬁer’s quality. For a two-class problem, it shows the true positives, true negatives, false positives, and false negatives. Measures that assess a classiﬁer’s predictive ability include accuracy, sensitivity (also known as recall), speciﬁcity, precision, F, and Fβ. Reliance on the accuracy measure can be deceiving when the main class of interest is in the minority. Construction and evaluation of a classiﬁer require partitioning labeled data into a training set and a test set. Holdout, random sampling, cross-validation, and bootstrapping are typical methods used for such partitioning. Signiﬁcance tests and ROC curves are useful tools for model selection. Signiﬁcance tests can be used to assess whether the difference in accuracy between two classiﬁers is due to chance. ROC curves plot the true positive rate (or sensitivity) versus the false positive rate (or 1 −speciﬁcity) of one or more classiﬁers. Ensemble methods can be used to increase overall accuracy by learning and combin- ing a series of individual (base) classiﬁer models. Bagging, boosting, and random forests are popular ensemble methods. The class imbalance problem occurs when the main class of interest is represented by only a few tuples. Strategies to address this problem include oversampling, undersampling, threshold moving, and ensemble techniques. 8.8 Exercises 8.1 Brieﬂy outline the major steps of decision tree classiﬁcation. 8.2 Why is tree pruning useful in decision tree induction? What is a drawback of using a separate set of tuples to evaluate pruning? 8.3 Given a decision tree, you have the option of (a) converting the decision tree to rules and then pruning the resulting rules, or (b) pruning the decision tree and then converting the pruned tree to rules. What advantage does (a) have over (b)? 8.4 It is important to calculate the worst-case computational complexity of the decision tree algorithm. Given data set, D, the number of attributes, n, and the number of training tuples, |D|, show that the computational cost of growing a tree is at most n × |D| × log(|D|). 8.5 Given a 5-GB data set with 50 attributes (each containing 100 distinct values) and 512 MB of main memory in your laptop, outline an efﬁcient method that constructs deci- sion trees in such large data sets. Justify your answer by rough calculation of your main memory usage. 8.8 Exercises 387 8.6 Why is na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁcation called “na¨ıve”? Brieﬂy outline the major ideas of na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁcation. 8.7 The following table consists of training data from an employee database. The data have been generalized. For example, “31 ... 35” for age represents the age range of 31 to 35. For a given row entry, count represents the number of data tuples having the values for department, status, age, and salary given in that row. department status age salary count sales senior 31...35 46K...50K 30 sales junior 26...30 26K...30K 40 sales junior 31...35 31K...35K 40 systems junior 21...25 46K...50K 20 systems senior 31...35 66K...70K 5 systems junior 26...30 46K...50K 3 systems senior 41...45 66K...70K 3 marketing senior 36...40 46K...50K 10 marketing junior 31...35 41K...45K 4 secretary senior 46...50 36K...40K 4 secretary junior 26...30 26K...30K 6 Let status be the class label attribute. (a) How would you modify the basic decision tree algorithm to take into consideration the count of each generalized data tuple (i.e., of each row entry)? (b) Use your algorithm to construct a decision tree from the given data. (c) Given a data tuple having the values “systems,” “26 ...30,” and “46–50K” for the attributes department, age, and salary, respectively, what would a na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁcation of the status for the tuple be? 8.8 RainForest is a scalable algorithm for decision tree induction. Develop a scalable na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁcation algorithm that requires just a single scan of the entire data set for most databases. Discuss whether such an algorithm can be reﬁned to incorporate boosting to further enhance its classiﬁcation accuracy. 8.9 Design an efﬁcient method that performs effective na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁcation over an inﬁnite data stream (i.e., you can scan the data stream only once). If we wanted to discover the evolution of such classiﬁcation schemes (e.g., comparing the classiﬁca- tion scheme at this moment with earlier schemes such as one from a week ago), what modiﬁed design would you suggest? 8.10 Show that accuracy is a function of sensitivity and speciﬁcity, that is, prove Eq. (8.25). 8.11 The harmonic mean is one of several kinds of averages. Chapter 2 discussed how to compute the arithmetic mean, which is what most people typically think of when they compute an average. The harmonic mean, H, of the positive real numbers, x1,x2,...,xn, 388 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts is deﬁned as H = n 1 x1 + 1 x2 + ··· + 1 xn = n Pn i=1 1 xi . The F measure is the harmonic mean of precision and recall. Use this fact to derive Eq. (8.28) for F. In addition, write Fβ as a function of true positives, false negatives, and false positives. 8.12 The data tuples of Figure 8.25 are sorted by decreasing probability value, as returned by a classiﬁer. For each tuple, compute the values for the number of true positives (TP), false positives (FP), true negatives (TN), and false negatives (FN). Compute the true positive rate (TPR) and false positive rate (FPR). Plot the ROC curve for the data. 8.13 It is difﬁcult to assess classiﬁcation accuracy when individual data objects may belong to more than one class at a time. In such cases, comment on what criteria you would use to compare different classiﬁers modeled after the same data. 8.14 Suppose that we want to select between two prediction models, M1 and M2. We have performed 10 rounds of 10-fold cross-validation on each model, where the same data partitioning in round i is used for both M1 and M2. The error rates obtained for M1 are 30.5, 32.2, 20.7, 20.6, 31.0, 41.0, 27.7, 26.0, 21.5, 26.0. The error rates for M2 are 22.4, 14.5, 22.4, 19.6, 20.7, 20.4, 22.1, 19.4, 16.2, 35.0. Comment on whether one model is signiﬁcantly better than the other considering a signiﬁcance level of 1%. 8.15 What is boosting? State why it may improve the accuracy of decision tree induction. Tuple # Class Probability 1 P 0.95 2 N 0.85 3 P 0.78 4 P 0.66 5 N 0.60 6 P 0.55 7 N 0.53 8 N 0.52 9 N 0.51 10 P 0.40 Figure 8.25 Tuples sorted by decreasing score, where the score is the value returned by a probabilistic classiﬁer. 8.9 Bibliographic Notes 389 8.16 Outline methods for addressing the class imbalance problem. Suppose a bank wants to develop a classiﬁer that guards against fraudulent credit card transactions. Illustrate how you can induce a quality classiﬁer based on a large set of nonfraudulent examples and a very small set of fraudulent cases. 8.9 Bibliographic Notes Classiﬁcation is a fundamental topic in machine learning, statistics, and pattern recog- nition. Many textbooks from these ﬁelds highlight classiﬁcation methods such as Mitchell [Mit97]; Bishop [Bis06]; Duda, Hart, and Stork [DHS01]; Theodoridis and Koutroumbas [TK08]; Hastie, Tibshirani, and Friedman [HTF09]; Alpaydin [Alp11]; and Marsland [Mar09]. For decision tree induction, the C4.5 algorithm is described in a book by Quinlan [Qui93]. The CART system is detailed in Classiﬁcation and Regression Trees by Breiman, Friedman, Olshen, and Stone [BFOS84]. Both books give an excellent presentation of many of the issues regarding decision tree induction. C4.5 has a commercial succes- sor, known as C5.0, which can be found at www.rulequest.com. ID3, a predecessor of C4.5, is detailed in Quinlan [Qui86]. It expands on pioneering work on concept learning systems, described by Hunt, Marin, and Stone [HMS66]. Other algorithms for decision tree induction include FACT (Loh and Vanichsetakul [LV88]), QUEST (Loh and Shih [LS97]), PUBLIC (Rastogi and Shim [RS98]), and CHAID (Kass [Kas80] and Magidson [Mag94]). INFERULE (Uthurusamy, Fayyad, and Spangler [UFS91]) learns decision trees from inconclusive data, where probabilistic rather than categorical classiﬁcation rules are obtained. KATE (Manago and Kodratoff [MK91]) learns decision trees from complex structured data. Incremental versions of ID3 include ID4 (Schlimmer and Fisher [SF86]) and ID5 (Utgoff [Utg88]), the latter of which is extended in Utgoff, Berkman, and Clouse [UBC97]. An incremental ver- sion of CART is described in Crawford [Cra89]. BOAT (Gehrke, Ganti, Ramakrishnan, and Loh [GGRL99]), a decision tree algorithm that addresses the scalability issue in data mining, is also incremental. Other decision tree algorithms that address scalability include SLIQ (Mehta, Agrawal, and Rissanen [MAR96]), SPRINT (Shafer, Agrawal, and Mehta [SAM96]), RainForest (Gehrke, Ramakrishnan, and Ganti [GRG98]), and earlier approaches such as Catlet [Cat91] and Chan and Stolfo [CS93a, CS93b]. For a comprehensive survey of many salient issues relating to decision tree induc- tion, such as attribute selection and pruning, see Murthy [Mur98]. Perception-based classiﬁcation (PBC), a visual and interactive approach to decision tree construction, is presented in Ankerst, Elsen, Ester, and Kriegel [AEEK99]. For a detailed discussion on attribute selection measures, see Kononenko and Hong [KH97]. Information gain was proposed by Quinlan [Qui86] and is based on pio- neering work on information theory by Shannon and Weaver [SW49]. The gain ratio, proposed as an extension to information gain, is described as part of C4.5 (Quinlan [Qui93]). The Gini index was proposed for CART in Breiman, Friedman, Olshen, and 390 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts Stone [BFOS84]. The G-statistic, based on information theory, is given in Sokal and Rohlf [SR81]. Comparisons of attribute selection measures include Buntine and Niblett [BN92], Fayyad and Irani [FI92], Kononenko [Kon95], Loh and Shih [LS97], and Shih [Shi99]. Fayyad and Irani [FI92] show limitations of impurity-based measures such as information gain and the Gini index. They propose a class of attribute selection mea- sures called C-SEP (Class SEParation), which outperform impurity-based measures in certain cases. Kononenko [Kon95] notes that attribute selection measures based on the minimum description length principle have the least bias toward multivalued attributes. Martin and Hirschberg [MH95] proved that the time complexity of decision tree induction increases exponentially with respect to tree height in the worst case, and under fairly general conditions in the average case. Fayad and Irani [FI90] found that shallow deci- sion trees tend to have many leaves and higher error rates for a large variety of domains. Attribute (or feature) construction is described in Liu and Motoda [LM98a, LM98b]. There are numerous algorithms for decision tree pruning, including cost complex- ity pruning (Breiman, Friedman, Olshen, and Stone [BFOS84]), reduced error pruning (Quinlan [Qui87]), and pessimistic pruning (Quinlan [Qui86]). PUBLIC (Rastogi and Shim [RS98]) integrates decision tree construction with tree pruning. MDL-based prun- ing methods can be found in Quinlan and Rivest [QR89]; Mehta, Agrawal, and Rissanen [MAR96]; and Rastogi and Shim [RS98]. Other methods include Niblett and Bratko [NB86] and Hosking, Pednault, and Sudan [HPS97]. For an empirical comparison of pruning methods, see Mingers [Min89] and Malerba, Floriana, and Semeraro [MFS95]. For a survey on simplifying decision trees,