2} I3 {{I2, I1: 2}, {I2: 2}, {I1: 2}} ⟨I2: 4, I1: 2⟩, ⟨I1: 2⟩ {I2, I3: 4}, {I1, I3: 4}, {I2, I1, I3: 2} I1 {{I2: 4}} ⟨I2: 4⟩ {I2, I1: 4} I2 4 I2:4 I1:2 I1:2 Node-link Item ID Support count null{} I1 4 Figure 6.8 The conditional FP-tree associated with the conditional node I3. Similar to the preceding analysis, I3’s conditional pattern base is {{I2, I1: 2}, {I2: 2}, {I1: 2}}. Its conditional FP-tree has two branches, ⟨I2: 4, I1: 2⟩and ⟨I1: 2⟩, as shown in Figure 6.8, which generates the set of patterns {{I2, I3: 4}, {I1, I3: 4}, {I2, I1, I3: 2}}. Finally, I1’s conditional pattern base is {{I2: 4}}, with an FP-tree that contains only one node, ⟨I2: 4⟩, which generates one frequent pattern, {I2, I1: 4}. This mining process is summarized in Figure 6.9. The FP-growth method transforms the problem of ﬁnding long frequent patterns into searching for shorter ones in much smaller conditional databases recursively and then concatenating the sufﬁx. It uses the least frequent items as a sufﬁx, offering good selectivity. The method substantially reduces the search costs. When the database is large, it is sometimes unrealistic to construct a main memory- based FP-tree. An interesting alternative is to ﬁrst partition the database into a set of projected databases, and then construct an FP-tree and mine it in each projected database. This process can be recursively applied to any projected database if its FP-tree still cannot ﬁt in main memory. A study of the FP-growth method performance shows that it is efﬁcient and scalable for mining both long and short frequent patterns, and is about an order of magnitude faster than the Apriori algorithm. 6.2.5 Mining Frequent Itemsets Using the Vertical Data Format Both the Apriori and FP-growth methods mine frequent patterns from a set of trans- actions in TID-itemset format (i.e., {TID : itemset}), where TID is a transaction ID and itemset is the set of items bought in transaction TID. This is known as the horizontal data format. Alternatively, data can be presented in item-TID set format 260 Chapter 6 Mining Frequent Patterns, Associations, and Correlations Algorithm: FP growth. Mine frequent itemsets using an FP-tree by pattern fragment growth. Input: D, a transaction database; min sup, the minimum support count threshold. Output: The complete set of frequent patterns. Method: 1. The FP-tree is constructed in the following steps: (a) Scan the transaction database D once. Collect F, the set of frequent items, and their support counts. Sort F in support count descending order as L, the list of frequent items. (b) Create the root of an FP-tree, and label it as “null.” For each transaction Trans in D do the following. Select and sort the frequent items in Trans according to the order of L. Let the sorted frequent item list in Trans be [p|P], where p is the ﬁrst element and P is the remaining list. Call insert tree([p|P], T), which is performed as follows. If T has a child N such that N.item-name = p.item-name, then increment N’s count by 1; else create a new node N, and let its count be 1, its parent link be linked to T, and its node-link to the nodes with the same item-name via the node-link structure. If P is nonempty, call insert tree(P, N) recursively. 2. The FP-tree is mined by calling FP growth(FP tree, null), which is implemented as follows. procedure FP growth(Tree, α) (1) if Tree contains a single path P then (2) for each combination (denoted as β) of the nodes in the path P (3) generate pattern β ∪α with support count = minimum support count of nodes in β; (4) else for each ai in the header of Tree { (5) generate pattern β = ai ∪α with support count = ai.support count; (6) construct β’s conditional pattern base and then β’s conditional FP tree Treeβ; (7) if Treeβ ̸= ∅then (8) call FP growth(Treeβ, β); } Figure 6.9 FP-growth algorithm for discovering frequent itemsets without candidate generation. (i.e., {item : TID set}), where item is an item name, and TID set is the set of transaction identiﬁers containing the item. This is known as the vertical data format. In this subsection, we look at how frequent itemsets can also be mined efﬁ- ciently using vertical data format, which is the essence of the Eclat (Equivalence Class Transformation) algorithm. Example 6.6 Mining frequent itemsets using the vertical data format. Consider the horizontal data format of the transaction database, D, of Table 6.1 in Example 6.3. This can be transformed into the vertical data format shown in Table 6.3 by scanning the data set once. Mining can be performed on this data set by intersecting the TID sets of every pair of frequent single items. The minimum support count is 2. Because every single item is 6.2 Frequent Itemset Mining Methods 261 Table 6.3 The Vertical Data Format of the Transaction Data Set D of Table 6.1 itemset TID set I1 {T100, T400, T500, T700, T800, T900} I2 {T100, T200, T300, T400, T600, T800, T900} I3 {T300, T500, T600, T700, T800, T900} I4 {T200, T400} I5 {T100, T800} Table 6.4 2-Itemsets in Vertical Data Format itemset TID set {I1, I2} {T100, T400, T800, T900} {I1, I3} {T500, T700, T800, T900} {I1, I4} {T400} {I1, I5} {T100, T800} {I2, I3} {T300, T600, T800, T900} {I2, I4} {T200, T400} {I2, I5} {T100, T800} {I3, I5} {T800} Table 6.5 3-Itemsets in Vertical Data Format itemset TID set {I1, I2, I3} {T800, T900} {I1, I2, I5} {T100, T800} frequent in Table 6.3, there are 10 intersections performed in total, which lead to eight nonempty 2-itemsets, as shown in Table 6.4. Notice that because the itemsets {I1, I4} and {I3, I5} each contain only one transaction, they do not belong to the set of frequent 2-itemsets. Based on the Apriori property, a given 3-itemset is a candidate 3-itemset only if every one of its 2-itemset subsets is frequent. The candidate generation process here will gen- erate only two 3-itemsets: {I1, I2, I3} and {I1, I2, I5}. By intersecting the TID sets of any two corresponding 2-itemsets of these candidate 3-itemsets, it derives Table 6.5, where there are only two frequent 3-itemsets: {I1, I2, I3: 2} and {I1, I2, I5: 2}. Example 6.6 illustrates the process of mining frequent itemsets by exploring the vertical data format. First, we transform the horizontally formatted data into the vertical format by scanning the data set once. The support count of an itemset is simply the length of the TID set of the itemset. Starting with k = 1, the frequent k-itemsets can be used to construct the candidate (k + 1)-itemsets based on the Apriori property. 262 Chapter 6 Mining Frequent Patterns, Associations, and Correlations The computation is done by intersection of the TID sets of the frequent k-itemsets to compute the TID sets of the corresponding (k + 1)-itemsets. This process repeats, with k incremented by 1 each time, until no frequent itemsets or candidate itemsets can be found. Besides taking advantage of the Apriori property in the generation of candidate (k + 1)-itemset from frequent k-itemsets, another merit of this method is that there is no need to scan the database to ﬁnd the support of (k + 1)-itemsets (for k ≥1). This is because the TID set of each k-itemset carries the complete information required for counting such support. However, the TID sets can be quite long, taking substantial memory space as well as computation time for intersecting the long sets. To further reduce the cost of registering long TID sets, as well as the subsequent costs of intersections, we can use a technique called diffset, which keeps track of only the differences of the TID sets of a (k + 1)-itemset and a corresponding k-itemset. For instance, in Example 6.6 we have {I1} = {T100, T400, T500, T700, T800, T900} and {I1, I2} = {T100, T400, T800, T900}. The diffset between the two is diffset({I1, I2}, {I1}) = {T500, T700}. Thus, rather than recording the four TIDs that make up the intersection of {I1} and {I2}, we can instead use diffset to record just two TIDs, indicating the difference between {I1} and {I1, I2}. Experiments show that in certain situations, such as when the data set contains many dense and long patterns, this technique can substantially reduce the total cost of vertical format mining of frequent itemsets. 6.2.6 Mining Closed and Max Patterns In Section 6.1.2 we saw how frequent itemset mining may generate a huge number of frequent itemsets, especially when the min sup threshold is set low or when there exist long patterns in the data set. Example 6.2 showed that closed frequent itemsets9 can substantially reduce the number of patterns generated in frequent itemset mining while preserving the complete information regarding the set of frequent itemsets. That is, from the set of closed frequent itemsets, we can easily derive the set of frequent itemsets and their support. Thus, in practice, it is more desirable to mine the set of closed frequent itemsets rather than the set of all frequent itemsets in most cases. “How can we mine closed frequent itemsets?” A naïve approach would be to ﬁrst mine the complete set of frequent itemsets and then remove every frequent itemset that is a proper subset of, and carries the same support as, an existing frequent itemset. However, this is quite costly. As shown in Example 6.2, this method would have to ﬁrst derive 2100 −1 frequent itemsets to obtain a length-100 frequent itemset, all before it could begin to eliminate redundant itemsets. This is prohibitively expensive. In fact, there exist only a very small number of closed frequent itemsets in Example 6.2’s data set. A recommended methodology is to search for closed frequent itemsets directly dur- ing the mining process. This requires us to prune the search space as soon as we 9Remember that X is a closed frequent itemset in a data set S if there exists no proper super-itemset Y such that Y has the same support count as X in S, and X satisﬁes minimum support. 6.2 Frequent Itemset Mining Methods 263 can identify the case of closed itemsets during mining. Pruning strategies include the following: Item merging: If every transaction containing a frequent itemset X also contains an itemset Y but not any proper superset of Y, then X ∪Y forms a frequent closed itemset and there is no need to search for any itemset containing X but no Y. For example, in Table 6.2 of Example 6.5, the projected conditional database for preﬁx itemset {I5:2} is {{I2, I1}, {I2, I1, I3}}, from which we can see that each of its transactions contains itemset {I2, I1} but no proper superset of {I2, I1}. Itemset {I2, I1} can be merged with {I5} to form the closed itemset, {I5, I2, I1: 2}, and we do not need to mine for closed itemsets that contain I5 but not {I2, I1}. Sub-itemset pruning: If a frequent itemset X is a proper subset of an already found fre- quent closed itemset Y and support count(X)=support count(Y), then X and all of X’s descendants in the set enumeration tree cannot be frequent closed itemsets and thus can be pruned. Similar to Example 6.2, suppose a transaction database has only two trans- actions: {⟨a1, a2,..., a100⟩, ⟨a1, a2,..., a50⟩}, and the minimum support count is min sup = 2. The projection on the ﬁrst item, a1, derives the frequent itemset, {a1, a2,..., a50 : 2}, based on the itemset merging optimization. Because support({a2}) = support({a1, a2,..., a50}) = 2, and {a2} is a proper subset of {a1, a2,..., a50}, there is no need to examine a2 and its projected database. Similar pruning can be done for a3,..., a50 as well. Thus, the mining of closed frequent itemsets in this data set terminates after mining a1’s projected database. Item skipping: In the depth-ﬁrst mining of closed itemsets, at each level, there will be a preﬁx itemset X associated with a header table and a projected database. If a local frequent item p has the same support in several header tables at different levels, we can safely prune p from the header tables at higher levels. Consider, for example, the previous transaction database having only two trans- actions: {⟨a1, a2,..., a100⟩, ⟨a1, a2,..., a50⟩}, where min sup = 2. Because a2 in a1’s projected database has the same support as a2 in the global header table, a2 can be pruned from the global header table. Similar pruning can be done for a3,..., a50. There is no need to mine anything more after mining a1’s projected database. Besides pruning the search space in the closed itemset mining process, another important optimization is to perform efﬁcient checking of each newly derived frequent itemset to see whether it is closed. This is because the mining process cannot ensure that every generated frequent itemset is closed. When a new frequent itemset is derived, it is necessary to perform two kinds of closure checking: (1) superset checking, which checks if this new frequent itemset is a superset of some already found closed itemsets with the same support, and (2) subset checking, which checks whether the newly found itemset is a subset of an already found closed itemset with the same support. If we adopt the item merging pruning method under a divide-and-conquer frame- work, then the superset checking is actually built-in and there is no need to explicitly 264 Chapter 6 Mining Frequent Patterns, Associations, and Correlations perform superset checking. This is because if a frequent itemset X ∪Y is found later than itemset X, and carries the same support as X, it must be in X’s projected database and must have been generated during itemset merging. To assist in subset checking, a compressed pattern-tree can be constructed to main- tain the set of closed itemsets mined so far. The pattern-tree is similar in structure to the FP-tree except that all the closed itemsets found are stored explicitly in the correspond- ing tree branches. For efﬁcient subset checking, we can use the following property: If the current itemset Sc can be subsumed by another already found closed itemset Sa, then (1) Sc and Sa have the same support, (2) the length of Sc is smaller than that of Sa, and (3) all of the items in Sc are contained in Sa. Based on this property, a two-level hash index structure can be built for fast access- ing of the pattern-tree: The ﬁrst level uses the identiﬁer of the last item in Sc as a hash key (since this identiﬁer must be within the branch of Sc), and the second level uses the sup- port of Sc as a hash key (since Sc and Sa have the same support). This will substantially speed up the subset checking process. This discussion illustrates methods for efﬁcient mining of closed frequent itemsets. “Can we extend these methods for efﬁcient mining of maximal frequent itemsets?” Because maximal frequent itemsets share many similarities with closed frequent itemsets, many of the optimization techniques developed here can be extended to mining maximal frequent itemsets. However, we leave this method as an exercise for interested readers. 6.3 Which Patterns Are Interesting?—Pattern Evaluation Methods Most association rule mining algorithms employ a support–conﬁdence framework. Although minimum support and conﬁdence thresholds help weed out or exclude the exploration of a good number of uninteresting rules, many of the rules generated are still not interesting to the users. Unfortunately, this is especially true when mining at low support thresholds or mining for long patterns. This has been a major bottleneck for successful application of association rule mining. In this section, we ﬁrst look at how even strong association rules can be uninteresting and misleading (Section 6.3.1). We then discuss how the support–conﬁdence frame- work can be supplemented with additional interestingness measures based on correlation analysis (Section 6.3.2). Section 6.3.3 presents additional pattern evaluation measures. It then provides an overall comparison of all the measures discussed here. By the end, you will learn which pattern evaluation measures are most effective for the discovery of only interesting rules. 6.3.1 Strong Rules Are Not Necessarily Interesting Whether or not a rule is interesting can be assessed either subjectively or objectively. Ultimately, only the user can judge if a given rule is interesting, and this judgment, being 6.3 Which Patterns Are Interesting?—Pattern Evaluation Methods 265 subjective, may differ from one user to another. However, objective interestingness mea- sures, based on the statistics “behind” the data, can be used as one step toward the goal of weeding out uninteresting rules that would otherwise be presented to the user. “How can we tell which strong association rules are really interesting?” Let’s examine the following example. Example 6.7 A misleading “strong” association rule. Suppose we are interested in analyzing trans- actions at AllElectronics with respect to the purchase of computer games and videos. Let game refer to the transactions containing computer games, and video refer to those containing videos. Of the 10,000 transactions analyzed, the data show that 6000 of the customer transactions included computer games, while 7500 included videos, and 4000 included both computer games and videos. Suppose that a data mining program for discovering association rules is run on the data, using a minimum support of, say, 30% and a minimum conﬁdence of 60%. The following association rule is discovered: buys(X, “computer games”) ⇒buys(X, “videos”) [support = 40%, conﬁdence = 66%]. (6.6) Rule (6.6) is a strong association rule and would therefore be reported, since its support value of 4000 10,000 = 40% and conﬁdence value of 4000 6000 = 66% satisfy the minimum support and minimum conﬁdence thresholds, respectively. However, Rule (6.6) is misleading because the probability of purchasing videos is 75%, which is even larger than 66%. In fact, computer games and videos are negatively associated because the purchase of one of these items actually decreases the likelihood of purchasing the other. Without fully understanding this phenomenon, we could easily make unwise business decisions based on Rule (6.6). Example 6.7 also illustrates that the conﬁdence of a rule A ⇒B can be deceiving. It does not measure the real strength (or lack of strength) of the correlation and implica- tion between A and B. Hence, alternatives to the support–conﬁdence framework can be useful in mining interesting data relationships. 6.3.2 From Association Analysis to Correlation Analysis As we have seen so far, the support and conﬁdence measures are insufﬁcient at ﬁltering out uninteresting association rules. To tackle this weakness, a correlation measure can be used to augment the support–conﬁdence framework for association rules. This leads to correlation rules of the form A ⇒B [support, conﬁdence, correlation]. (6.7) That is, a correlation rule is measured not only by its support and conﬁdence but also by the correlation between itemsets A and B. There are many different correlation mea- sures from which to choose. In this subsection, we study several correlation measures to determine which would be good for mining large data sets. 266 Chapter 6 Mining Frequent Patterns, Associations, and Correlations Lift is a simple correlation measure that is given as follows. The occurrence of itemset A is independent of the occurrence of itemset B if P(A ∪B) = P(A)P(B); otherwise, itemsets A and B are dependent and correlated as events. This deﬁnition can easily be extended to more than two itemsets. The lift between the occurrence of A and B can be measured by computing lift(A, B) = P(A ∪B) P(A)P(B). (6.8) If the resulting value of Eq. (6.8) is less than 1, then the occurrence of A is negatively correlated with the occurrence of B, meaning that the occurrence of one likely leads to the absence of the other one. If the resulting value is greater than 1, then A and B are positively correlated, meaning that the occurrence of one implies the occurrence of the other. If the resulting value is equal to 1, then A and B are independent and there is no correlation between them. Equation (6.8) is equivalent to P(B|A)/P(B), or conf(A ⇒B)/sup(B), which is also referred to as the lift of the association (or correlation) rule A ⇒B. In other words, it assesses the degree to which the occurrence of one “lifts” the occurrence of the other. For example, if A corresponds to the sale of computer games and B corresponds to the sale of videos, then given the current market conditions, the sale of games is said to increase or “lift” the likelihood of the sale of videos by a factor of the value returned by Eq. (6.8). Let’s go back to the computer game and video data of Example 6.7. Example 6.8 Correlation analysis using lift. To help ﬁlter out misleading “strong” associations of the form A ⇒B from the data of Example 6.7, we need to study how the two item- sets, A and B, are correlated. Let game refer to the transactions of Example 6.7 that do not contain computer games, and video refer to those that do not contain videos. The transactions can be summarized in a contingency table, as shown in Table 6.6. From the table, we can see that the probability of purchasing a computer game is P({game}) = 0.60, the probability of purchasing a video is P({video}) = 0.75, and the probability of purchasing both is P({game,video}) = 0.40. By Eq. (6.8), the lift of Rule (6.6) is P({game, video})/(P({game}) × P({video})) = 0.40/(0.60 × 0.75) = 0.89. Because this value is less than 1, there is a negative correlation between the occur- rence of {game} and {video}. The numerator is the likelihood of a customer purchasing both, while the denominator is what the likelihood would have been if the two pur- chases were completely independent. Such a negative correlation cannot be identiﬁed by a support–conﬁdence framework. The second correlation measure that we study is the χ2 measure, which was intro- duced in Chapter 3 (Eq. 3.1). To compute the χ2 value, we take the squared difference between the observed and expected value for a slot (A and B pair) in the contin- gency table, divided by the expected value. This amount is summed for all slots of the contingency table. Let’s perform a χ2 analysis of Example 6.8. 6.3 Which Patterns Are Interesting?—Pattern Evaluation Methods 267 Table 6.6 2 × 2 Contingency Table Summarizing the Transactions with Respect to Game and Video Purchases game game 6row video 4000 3500 7500 video 2000 500 2500 6col 6000 4000 10,000 Table 6.7 Table 6.6 Contingency Table, Now with the Expected Values game game 6row video 4000 (4500) 3500 (3000) 7500 video 2000 (1500) 500 (1000) 2500 6col 6000 4000 10,000 Example 6.9 Correlation analysis using χ2. To compute the correlation using χ2 analysis for nom- inal data, we need the observed value and expected value (displayed in parenthesis) for each slot of the contingency table, as shown in Table 6.7. From the table, we can compute the χ2 value as follows: χ2 = 6 (observed −expected)2 expected = (4000 −4500)2 4500 + (3500 −3000)2 3000 + (2000 −1500)2 1500 + (500 −1000)2 1000 = 555.6. Because the χ2 value is greater than 1, and the observed value of the slot (game, video) = 4000, which is less than the expected value of 4500, buying game and buying video are negatively correlated. This is consistent with the conclusion derived from the analysis of the lift measure in Example 6.8. 6.3.3 A Comparison of Pattern Evaluation Measures The above discussion shows that instead of using the simple support–conﬁdence frame- work to evaluate frequent patterns, other measures, such as lift and χ2, often disclose more intrinsic pattern relationships. How effective are these measures? Should we also consider other alternatives? Researchers have studied many pattern evaluation measures even before the start of in-depth research on scalable methods for mining frequent patterns. Recently, several other pattern evaluation measures have attracted interest. In this subsection, we present 268 Chapter 6 Mining Frequent Patterns, Associations, and Correlations four such measures: all conﬁdence, max conﬁdence, Kulczynski, and cosine. We’ll then compare their effectiveness with respect to one another and with respect to the lift and χ2 measures. Given two itemsets, A and B, the all conﬁdence measure of A and B is deﬁned as all conf(A,B) = sup(A ∪B) max{sup(A),sup(B)} = min{P(A|B),P(B|A)}, (6.9) where max{sup(A), sup(B)} is the maximum support of the itemsets A and B. Thus, all conf(A,B) is also the minimum conﬁdence of the two association rules related to A and B, namely, “A ⇒B” and “B ⇒A.” Given two itemsets, A and B, the max conﬁdence measure of A and B is deﬁned as max conf(A, B) = max{P(A|B),P(B|A)}. (6.10) The max conf measure is the maximum conﬁdence of the two association rules, “A ⇒B” and “B ⇒A.” Given two itemsets, A and B, the Kulczynski measure of A and B (abbreviated as Kulc) is deﬁned as Kulc(A, B) = 1 2(P(A|B) + P(B|A)). (6.11) It was proposed in 1927 by Polish mathematician S. Kulczynski. It can be viewed as an average of two conﬁdence measures. That is, it is the average of two conditional prob- abilities: the probability of itemset B given itemset A, and the probability of itemset A given itemset B. Finally, given two itemsets, A and B, the cosine measure of A and B is deﬁned as cosine(A, B) = P(A ∪B) √P(A) × P(B) = sup(A ∪B) p sup(A) × sup(B) = p P(A|B) × P(B|A). (6.12) The cosine measure can be viewed as a harmonized lift measure: The two formulae are similar except that for cosine, the square root is taken on the product of the probabilities of A and B. This is an important difference, however, because by taking the square root, the cosine value is only inﬂuenced by the supports of A, B, and A ∪B, and not by the total number of transactions. Each of these four measures deﬁned has the following property: Its value is only inﬂuenced by the supports of A, B, and A ∪B, or more exactly, by the conditional prob- abilities of P(A|B) and P(B|A), but not by the total number of transactions. Another common property is that each measure ranges from 0 to 1, and the higher the value, the closer the relationship between A and B. Now, together with lift and χ2, we have introduced in total six pattern evaluation measures. You may wonder, “Which is the best in assessing the discovered pattern rela- tionships?” To answer this question, we examine their performance on some typical data sets. 6.3 Which Patterns Are Interesting?—Pattern Evaluation Methods 269 Table 6.8 2 × 2 Contingency Table for Two Items milk milk 6row coffee mc mc c coffee mc mc c 6col m m 6 Table 6.9 Comparison of Six Pattern Evaluation Measures Using Contingency Tables for a Variety of Data Sets Data Set mc mc mc mc χ2 lift all conf. max conf. Kulc. cosine D1 10,000 1000 1000 100,000 90557 9.26 0.91 0.91 0.91 0.91 D2 10,000 1000 1000 100 0 1 0.91 0.91 0.91 0.91 D3 100 1000 1000 100,000 670 8.44 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.09 D4 1000 1000 1000 100,000 24740 25.75 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 D5 1000 100 10,000 100,000 8173 9.18 0.09 0.91 0.5 0.29 D6 1000 10 100,000 100,000 965 1.97 0.01 0.99 0.5 0.10 Example 6.10 Comparison of six pattern evaluation measures on typical data sets. The relationships between the purchases of two items, milk and coffee, can be examined by summarizing their purchase history in Table 6.8, a 2 × 2 contingency table, where an entry such as mc represents the number of transactions containing both milk and coffee. Table 6.9 shows a set of transactional data sets with their corresponding contin- gency tables and the associated values for each of the six evaluation measures. Let’s ﬁrst examine the ﬁrst four data sets, D1 through D4. From the table, we see that m and c are positively associated in D1 and D2, negatively associated in D3, and neu- tral in D4. For D1 and D2, m and c are positively associated because mc (10,000) is considerably greater than mc (1000) and mc (1000). Intuitively, for people who bought milk (m = 10,000 + 1000 = 11,000), it is very likely that they also bought coffee (mc/m = 10/11 = 91%), and vice versa. The results of the four newly introduced measures show that m and c are strongly positively associated in both data sets by producing a measure value of 0.91. However, lift and χ2 generate dramatically different measure values for D1 and D2 due to their sensitivity to mc. In fact, in many real-world scenarios, mc is usually huge and unstable. For example, in a market basket database, the total number of transactions could ﬂuctu- ate on a daily basis and overwhelmingly exceed the number of transactions containing any particular itemset. Therefore, a good interestingness measure should not be affected by transactions that do not contain the itemsets of interest; otherwise, it would generate unstable results, as illustrated in D1 and D2. 270 Chapter 6 Mining Frequent Patterns, Associations, and Correlations Similarly, in D3, the four new measures correctly show that m and c are strongly negatively associated because the m to c ratio equals the mc to m ratio, that is, 100/1100 = 9.1%. However, lift and χ2 both contradict this in an incorrect way: Their values for D2 are between those for D1 and D3. For data set D4, both lift and χ2 indicate a highly positive association between m and c, whereas the others indicate a “neutral” association because the ratio of mc to mc equals the ratio of mc to mc, which is 1. This means that if a customer buys coffee (or milk), the probability that he or she will also purchase milk (or coffee) is exactly 50%. “Why are lift and χ2 so poor at distinguishing pattern association relationships in the previous transactional data sets?” To answer this, we have to consider the null- transactions. A null-transaction is a transaction that does not contain any of the item- sets being examined. In our example, mc represents the number of null-transactions. Lift and χ2 have difﬁculty distinguishing interesting pattern association relationships because they are both strongly inﬂuenced by mc. Typically, the number of null- transactions can outweigh the number of individual purchases because, for example, many people may buy neither milk nor coffee. On the other hand, the other four measures are good indicators of interesting pattern associations because their deﬁ- nitions remove the inﬂuence of mc (i.e., they are not inﬂuenced by the number of null-transactions). This discussion shows that it is highly desirable to have a measure that has a value that is independent of the number of null-transactions. A measure is null-invariant if its value is free from the inﬂuence of null-transactions. Null-invariance is an impor- tant property for measuring association patterns in large transaction databases. Among the six discussed measures in this subsection, only lift and χ2 are not null-invariant measures. “Among the all conﬁdence, max conﬁdence, Kulczynski, and cosine measures, which is best at indicating interesting pattern relationships?” To answer this question, we introduce the imbalance ratio (IR), which assesses the imbalance of two itemsets, A and B, in rule implications. It is deﬁned as IR(A,B) = |sup(A) −sup(B)| sup(A) + sup(B) −sup(A ∪B), (6.13) where the numerator is the absolute value of the difference between the support of the itemsets A and B, and the denominator is the number of transactions containing A or B. If the two directional implications between A and B are the same, then IR(A,B) will be zero. Otherwise, the larger the difference between the two, the larger the imbalance ratio. This ratio is independent of the number of null-transactions and independent of the total number of transactions. Let’s continue examining the remaining data sets in Example 6.10. Example 6.11 Comparing null-invariant measures in pattern evaluation. Although the four mea- sures introduced in this section are null-invariant, they may present dramatically 6.4 Summary 271 different values on some subtly different data sets. Let’s examine data sets D5 and D6, shown earlier in Table 6.9, where the two events m and c have unbalanced conditional probabilities. That is, the ratio of mc to c is greater than 0.9. This means that knowing that c occurs should strongly suggest that m occurs also. The ratio of mc to m is less than 0.1, indicating that m implies that c is quite unlikely to occur. The all conﬁdence and cosine measures view both cases as negatively associated and the Kulc measure views both as neutral. The max conﬁdence measure claims strong positive associations for these cases. The measures give very diverse results! “Which measure intuitively reﬂects the true relationship between the purchase of milk and coffee?” Due to the “balanced” skewness of the data, it is difﬁcult to argue whether the two data sets have positive or negative association. From one point of view, only mc/(mc + mc) = 1000/(1000 + 10,000) = 9.09% of milk-related transactions contain coffee in D5 and this percentage is 1000/(1000 + 100,000) = 0.99% in D6, both indi- cating a negative association. On the other hand, 90.9% of transactions in D5 (i.e., mc/(mc + mc) = 1000/(1000 + 100)) and 9% in D6 (i.e., 1000/(1000 + 10)) contain- ing coffee contain milk as well, which indicates a positive association between milk and coffee. These draw very different conclusions. For such “balanced” skewness, it could be fair to treat it as neutral, as Kulc does, and in the meantime indicate its skewness using the imbalance ratio (IR). According to Eq. (6.13), for D4 we have IR(m,c) = 0, a perfectly balanced case; for D5, IR(m,c) = 0.89, a rather imbalanced case; whereas for D6, IR(m,c) = 0.99, a very skewed case. Therefore, the two measures, Kulc and IR, work together, presenting a clear picture for all three data sets, D4 through D6. In summary, the use of only support and conﬁdence measures to mine associa- tions may generate a large number of rules, many of which can be uninteresting to users. Instead, we can augment the support–conﬁdence framework with a pattern inter- estingness measure, which helps focus the mining toward rules with strong pattern relationships. The added measure substantially reduces the number of rules gener- ated and leads to the discovery of more meaningful rules. Besides those introduced in this section, many other interestingness measures have been studied in the literature. Unfortunately, most of them do not have the null-invariance property. Because large data sets typically have many null-transactions, it is important to consider the null- invariance property when selecting appropriate interestingness measures for pattern evaluation. Among the four null-invariant measures studied here, namely all conﬁdence, max conﬁdence, Kulc, and cosine, we recommend using Kulc in conjunction with the imbalance ratio. 6.4 Summary The discovery of frequent patterns, associations, and correlation relationships among huge amounts of data is useful in selective marketing, decision analysis, and business management. A popular area of application is market basket analysis, which studies 272 Chapter 6 Mining Frequent Patterns, Associations, and Correlations customers’ buying habits by searching for itemsets that are frequently purchased together (or in sequence). Association rule mining consists of ﬁrst ﬁnding frequent itemsets (sets of items, such as A and B, satisfying a minimum support threshold, or percentage of the task- relevant tuples), from which strong association rules in the form of A ⇒B are generated. These rules also satisfy a minimum conﬁdence threshold (a prespeciﬁed probability of satisfying B under the condition that A is satisﬁed). Associations can be further analyzed to uncover correlation rules, which convey statistical correlations between itemsets A and B. Many efﬁcient and scalable algorithms have been developed for frequent itemset mining, from which association and correlation rules can be derived. These algo- rithms can be classiﬁed into three categories: (1) Apriori-like algorithms, (2) frequent pattern growth–based algorithms such as FP-growth, and (3) algorithms that use the vertical data format. The Apriori algorithm is a seminal algorithm for mining frequent itemsets for Boolean association rules. It explores the level-wise mining Apriori property that all nonempty subsets of a frequent itemset must also be frequent. At the kth iteration (for k ≥2), it forms frequent k-itemset candidates based on the frequent (k −1)-itemsets, and scans the database once to ﬁnd the complete set of frequent k-itemsets, Lk. Variations involving hashing and transaction reduction can be used to make the procedure more efﬁcient. Other variations include partitioning the data (mining on each partition and then combining the results) and sampling the data (mining on a data subset). These variations can reduce the number of data scans required to as little as two or even one. Frequent pattern growth is a method of mining frequent itemsets without candidate generation. It constructs a highly compact data structure (an FP-tree) to compress the originaltransactiondatabase.Ratherthanemployingthegenerate-and-teststrategyof Apriori-like methods, it focuses on frequent pattern (fragment) growth, which avoids costly candidate generation, resulting in greater efﬁciency. Mining frequent itemsets using the vertical data format (Eclat) is a method that transforms a given data set of transactions in the horizontal data format of TID- itemset into the vertical data format of item-TID set. It mines the transformed data set by TID set intersections based on the Apriori property and additional optimization techniques such as diffset. Not all strong association rules are interesting. Therefore, the support–conﬁdence framework should be augmented with a pattern evaluation measure, which promotes the mining of interesting rules. A measure is null-invariant if its value is free from the inﬂuence of null-transactions (i.e., the transactions that do not contain any of the itemsets being examined). Among many pattern evaluation measures, we exam- ined lift, χ2, all conﬁdence, max conﬁdence, Kulczynski, and cosine, and showed 6.5 Exercises 273 that only the latter four are null-invariant. We suggest using the Kulczynski measure, together with the imbalance ratio, to present pattern relationships among itemsets. 6.5 Exercises 6.1 Suppose you have the set C of all frequent closed itemsets on a data set D, as well as the support count for each frequent closed itemset. Describe an algorithm to determine whether a given itemset X is frequent or not, and the support of X if it is frequent. 6.2 An itemset X is called a generator on a data set D if there does not exist a proper sub-itemset Y ⊂X such that support(X) = support(Y). A generator X is a frequent generator if support(X) passes the minimum support threshold. Let G be the set of all frequent generators on a data set D. (a) Can you determine whether an itemset A is frequent and the support of A, if it is frequent, using only G and the support counts of all frequent generators? If yes, present your algorithm. Otherwise, what other information is needed? Can you give an algorithm assuming the information needed is available? (b) What is the relationship between closed itemsets and generators? 6.3 The Apriori algorithm makes use of prior knowledge of subset support properties. (a) Prove that all nonempty subsets of a frequent itemset must also be frequent. (b) Prove that the support of any nonempty subset s′ of itemset s must be at least as great as the support of s. (c) Given frequent itemset l and subset s of l, prove that the conﬁdence of the rule “s′ ⇒(l −s′)” cannot be more than the conﬁdence of “s ⇒(l −s),” where s′ is a subset of s. (d) A partitioning variation of Apriori subdivides the transactions of a database D into n nonoverlapping partitions. Prove that any itemset that is frequent in D must be frequent in at least one partition of D. 6.4 Let c be a candidate itemset in Ck generated by the Apriori algorithm. How many length-(k −1) subsets do we need to check in the prune step? Per your previ- ous answer, can you give an improved version of procedure has infrequent subset in Figure 6.4? 6.5 Section 6.2.2 describes a method for generating association rules from frequent itemsets. Propose a more efﬁcient method. Explain why it is more efﬁcient than the one proposed there. (Hint: Consider incorporating the properties of Exercises 6.3(b), (c) into your design.) 6.6 A database has ﬁve transactions. Let min sup = 60% and min conf = 80%. 274 Chapter 6 Mining Frequent Patterns, Associations, and Correlations TID items bought T100 {M, O, N, K, E, Y} T200 {D, O, N, K, E, Y } T300 {M, A, K, E} T400 {M, U, C, K, Y} T500 {C, O, O, K, I, E} (a) Find all frequent itemsets using Apriori and FP-growth, respectively. Compare the efﬁciency of the two mining processes. (b) List all the strong association rules (with support s and conﬁdence c) matching the following metarule, where X is a variable representing customers, and itemi denotes variables representing items (e.g., “A,” “B,”): ∀x ∈transaction, buys(X,item1) ∧buys(X,item2) ⇒buys(X,item3) [s,c] 6.7 (Implementation project) Using a programming language that you are familiar with, such as C++ or Java, implement three frequent itemset mining algorithms introduced in this chapter: (1) Apriori [AS94b], (2) FP-growth [HPY00], and (3) Eclat [Zak00] (mining using the vertical data format). Compare the perfor- mance of each algorithm with various kinds of large data sets. Write a report to analyze the situations (e.g., data size, data distribution, minimal support thresh- old setting, and pattern density) where one algorithm may perform better than the others, and state why. 6.8 A database has four transactions. Let min sup = 60% and min conf = 80%. cust ID TID items bought (in the form of brand-item category) 01 T100 {King’s-Crab, Sunset-Milk, Dairyland-Cheese, Best-Bread} 02 T200 {Best-Cheese, Dairyland-Milk, Goldenfarm-Apple, Tasty-Pie, Wonder-Bread} 01 T300 {Westcoast-Apple, Dairyland-Milk, Wonder-Bread, Tasty-Pie} 03 T400 {Wonder-Bread, Sunset-Milk, Dairyland-Cheese} (a) At the granularity of item category (e.g., itemi could be “Milk”), for the rule template, ∀X ∈transaction, buys(X,item1) ∧buys(X,item2) ⇒buys(X,item3) [s,c], list the frequent k-itemset for the largest k, and all the strong association rules (with their support s and conﬁdence c) containing the frequent k-itemset for the largest k. (b) At the granularity of brand-item category (e.g., itemi could be “Sunset-Milk”), for the rule template, ∀X ∈customer, buys(X,item1) ∧buys(X,item2) ⇒buys(X,item3), list the frequent k-itemset for the largest k (but do not print any rules). 6.5 Exercises 275 6.9 Suppose that a large store has a transactional database that is distributed among four locations. Transactions in each component database have the same for- mat, namely Tj : {i1,...,im}, where Tj is a transaction identiﬁer, and ik (1 ≤ k ≤m) is the identiﬁer of an item purchased in the transaction. Propose an efﬁcient algorithm to mine global association rules. You may present your algo- rithm in the form of an outline. Your algorithm should not require shipping all the data to one site and should not cause excessive network communication overhead. 6.10 Suppose that frequent itemsets are saved for a large transactional database, DB. Discuss how to efﬁciently mine the (global) association rules under the same minimum support threshold, if a set of new transactions, denoted as 1DB, is (incrementally) added in? 6.11 Most frequent pattern mining algorithms consider only distinct items in a transac- tion. However, multiple occurrences of an item in the same shopping basket, such as four cakes and three jugs of milk, can be important in transactional data analysis. How can one mine frequent itemsets efﬁciently considering multiple occurrences of items? Propose modiﬁcations to the well-known algorithms, such as Apriori and FP-growth, to adapt to such a situation. 6.12 (Implementation project) Many techniques have been proposed to further improve the performance of frequent itemset mining algorithms. Taking FP-tree– based frequent pattern growth algorithms (e.g., FP-growth) as an example, imple- ment one of the following optimization techniques. Compare the performance of your new implementation with the unoptimized version. (a) The frequent pattern mining method of Section 6.2.4 uses an FP-tree to gen- erate conditional pattern bases using a bottom-up projection technique (i.e., project onto the preﬁx path of an item p). However, one can develop a top- down projection technique, that is, project onto the sufﬁx path of an item p in the generation of a conditional pattern base. Design and implement such a top- down FP-tree mining method. Compare its performance with the bottom-up projection method. (b) Nodes and pointers are used uniformly in an FP-tree in the FP-growth algo- rithm design. However, such a structure may consume a lot of space when the data are sparse. One possible alternative design is to explore array- and pointer-based hybrid implementation, where a node may store multiple items when it contains no splitting point to multiple sub-branches. Develop such an implementation and compare it with the original one. (c) It is time and space consuming to generate numerous conditional pattern bases during pattern-growth mining. An interesting alternative is to push right the branches that have been mined for a particular item p, that is, to push them to the remaining branch(es) of the FP-tree. This is done so that fewer conditional pattern bases have to be generated and additional sharing can be explored when mining the remaining FP-tree branches. Design and implement such a method and conduct a performance study on it. 276 Chapter 6 Mining Frequent Patterns, Associations, and Correlations 6.13 Give a short example to show that items in a strong association rule actually may be negatively correlated. 6.14 The following contingency table summarizes supermarket transaction data, where hot dogs refers to the transactions containing hot dogs, hot dogs refers to the transactions that do not contain hot dogs, hamburgers refers to the transactions containing hamburgers, and hamburgers refers to the transactions that do not contain hamburgers. hot dogs hot dogs 6row hamburgers 2000 500 2500 hamburgers 1000 1500 2500 6col 3000 2000 5000 (a) Suppose that the association rule “hot dogs ⇒hamburgers” is mined. Given a minimum support threshold of 25% and a minimum conﬁdence threshold of 50%, is this association rule strong? (b) Based on the given data, is the purchase of hot dogs independent of the purchase of hamburgers? If not, what kind of correlation relationship exists between the two? (c) Compare the use of the all conﬁdence, max conﬁdence, Kulczynski, and cosine measures with lift and correlation on the given data. 6.15 (Implementation project) The DBLP data set (www.informatik.uni-trier .de/∼ley/db/) consists of over one million entries of research papers pub- lished in computer science conferences and journals. Among these entries, there are a good number of authors that have coauthor relationships. (a) Propose a method to efﬁciently mine a set of coauthor relationships that are closely correlated (e.g., often coauthoring papers together). (b) Based on the mining results and the pattern evaluation measures discussed in this chapter, discuss which measure may convincingly uncover close collabora- tion patterns better than others. (c) Based on the study in (a), develop a method that can roughly predict advi- sor and advisee relationships and the approximate period for such advisory supervision. 6.6 Bibliographic Notes Association rule mining was ﬁrst proposed by Agrawal, Imielinski, and Swami [AIS93]. The Apriori algorithm discussed in Section 6.2.1 for frequent itemset mining was pre- sented in Agrawal and Srikant [AS94b]. A variation of the algorithm using a similar pruning heuristic was developed independently by Mannila, Tiovonen, and Verkamo 6.6 Bibliographic Notes 277 [MTV94]. A joint publication combining these works later appeared in Agrawal, Mannila, Srikant et al. [AMS+96]. A method for generating association rules from frequent itemsets is described in Agrawal and Srikant [AS94a]. References for the variations of Apriori described in Section 6.2.3 include the following. The use of hash tables to improve association mining efﬁciency was stud- ied by Park, Chen, and Yu [PCY95a]. The partitioning technique was proposed by Savasere, Omiecinski, and Navathe [SON95]. The sampling approach is discussed in Toivonen [Toi96]. A dynamic itemset counting approach is given in Brin, Motwani, Ullman, and Tsur [BMUT97]. An efﬁcient incremental updating of mined association rules was proposed by Cheung, Han, Ng, and Wong [CHNW96]. Parallel and dis- tributed association data mining under the Apriori framework was studied by Park, Chen, and Yu [PCY95b]; Agrawal and Shafer [AS96]; and Cheung, Han, Ng, et al. [CHN+96]. Another parallel association mining method, which explores itemset clus- tering using a vertical database layout, was proposed in Zaki, Parthasarathy, Ogihara, and Li [ZPOL97]. Other scalable frequent itemset mining methods have been proposed as alterna- tives to the Apriori-based approach. FP-growth, a pattern-growth approach for mining frequent itemsets without candidate generation, was proposed by Han, Pei, and Yin [HPY00] (Section 6.2.4). An exploration of hyper structure mining of frequent patterns, called H-Mine, was proposed by Pei, Han, Lu, et al. [PHL+01]. A method that integrates top-down and bottom-up traversal of FP-trees in pattern-growth mining was proposed by Liu, Pan, Wang, and Han [LPWH02]. An array-based implementation of preﬁx- tree structure for efﬁcient pattern growth mining was proposed by Grahne and Zhu [GZ03b]. Eclat, an approach for mining frequent itemsets by exploring the vertical data format, was proposed by Zaki [Zak00]. A depth-ﬁrst generation of frequent itemsets by a tree projection technique was proposed by Agarwal, Aggarwal, and Prasad [AAP01]. An integration of association mining with relational database systems was studied by Sarawagi, Thomas, and Agrawal [STA98]. The mining of frequent closed itemsets was proposed in Pasquier, Bastide, Taouil, and Lakhal [PBTL99], where an Apriori-based algorithm called A-Close for such min- ing was presented. CLOSET, an efﬁcient closed itemset mining algorithm based on the frequent pattern growth method, was proposed by Pei, Han, and Mao [PHM00]. CHARM by Zaki and Hsiao [ZH02] developed a compact vertical TID list structure called diffset, which records only the difference in the TID list of a candidate pattern from its preﬁx pattern. A fast hash-based approach is also used in CHARM to prune nonclosed patterns. CLOSET+ by Wang, Han, and Pei [WHP03] integrates previously proposed effective strategies as well as newly developed techniques such as hybrid tree- projection and item skipping. AFOPT, a method that explores a right push operation on FP-trees during the mining process, was proposed by Liu, Lu, Lou, and Yu [LLLY03]. Grahne and Zhu [GZ03b] proposed a preﬁx-tree–based algorithm integrated with array representation, called FPClose, for mining closed itemsets using a pattern-growth approach. Pan, Cong, Tung, et al. [PCT+03] proposed CARPENTER, a method for ﬁnding closed patterns in long biological data sets, which integrates the advantages of vertical 278 Chapter 6 Mining Frequent Patterns, Associations, and Correlations data formats and pattern growth methods. Mining max-patterns was ﬁrst studied by Bayardo [Bay98], where MaxMiner, an Apriori-based, level-wise, breadth-ﬁrst search method, was proposed to ﬁnd max-itemset by performing superset frequency pruning and subset infrequency pruning for search space reduction. Another efﬁcient method, MAFIA, developed by Burdick, Calimlim, and Gehrke [BCG01], uses vertical bitmaps to compress TID lists, thus improving the counting efﬁciency. A FIMI (Frequent Itemset Mining Implementation) workshop dedicated to implementation methods for frequent itemset mining was reported by Goethals and Zaki [GZ03a]. The problem of mining interesting rules has been studied by many researchers. The statistical independence of rules in data mining was studied by Piatetski-Shapiro [P-S91]. The interestingness problem of strong association rules is discussed in Chen, Han, and Yu [CHY96]; Brin, Motwani, and Silverstein [BMS97]; and Aggarwal and Yu [AY99], which cover several interestingness measures, including lift. An efﬁcient method for generalizing associations to correlations is given in Brin, Motwani, and Silverstein [BMS97]. Other alternatives to the support–conﬁdence framework for assess- ing the interestingness of association rules are proposed in Brin, Motwani, Ullman, and Tsur [BMUT97] and Ahmed, El-Makky, and Taha [AEMT00]. A method for mining strong gradient relationships among itemsets was proposed by Imielinski, Khachiyan, and Abdulghani [IKA02]. Silverstein, Brin, Motwani, and Ullman [SBMU98] studied the problem of mining causal structures over transaction databases. Some comparative studies of different interestingness measures were done by Hilderman and Hamilton [HH01]. The notion of null transaction invariance was intro- duced, together with a comparative analysis of interestingness measures, by Tan, Kumar, and Srivastava [TKS02]. The use of all conﬁdence as a correlation measure for generating interesting association rules was studied by Omiecinski [Omi03] and by Lee, Kim, Cai, and Han [LKCH03]. Wu, Chen, and Han [WCH10] introduced the Kulczynski measure for associative patterns and performed a comparative analysis of a set of measures for pattern evaluation. 7 Advanced Pattern Mining Frequent pattern mining has reached far beyond the basics due to substantial research, numer- ous extensions of the problem scope, and broad application studies. In this chapter, you will learn methods for advanced pattern mining. We begin by laying out a general road map for pattern mining. We introduce methods for mining various kinds of patterns, and discuss extended applications of pattern mining. We include in-depth coverage of methods for mining many kinds of patterns: multilevel patterns, multidimensional pat- terns, patterns in continuous data, rare patterns, negative patterns, constrained frequent patterns, frequent patterns in high-dimensional data, colossal patterns, and compressed and approximate patterns. Other pattern mining themes, including mining sequential and structured patterns and mining patterns from spatiotemporal, multimedia, and stream data, are considered more advanced topics and are not covered in this book. Notice that pattern mining is a more general term than frequent pattern mining since the former covers rare and negative patterns as well. However, when there is no ambiguity, the two terms are used interchangeably. 7.1 Pattern Mining: A Road Map Chapter 6 introduced the basic concepts, techniques, and applications of frequent pat- tern mining using market basket analysis as an example. Many other kinds of data, user requests, and applications have led to the development of numerous, diverse methods for mining patterns, associations, and correlation relationships. Given the rich literature in this area, it is important to lay out a clear road map to help us get an organized picture of the ﬁeld and to select the best methods for pattern mining applications. Figure 7.1 outlines a general road map on pattern mining research. Most stud- ies mainly address three pattern mining aspects: the kinds of patterns mined, mining methodologies, and applications. Some studies, however, integrate multiple aspects; for example, different applications may need to mine different patterns, which naturally leads to the development of new mining methodologies. c⃝2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques 279 280 Chapter 7 Advanced Pattern Mining frequent patterns association rules closed/max patterns generators candidate generation (Apriori, partitioning, sampling, ...) Pattern growth (FP-growth, HMine, FPMax, Closet+, ...) vertical format (Eclat, CHARM, ...) multilevel (uniform, varied, or itemset-based support) multidimensional patterns (incl. high-dimensional patterns) continuous data (discretization-based or statistical) sequential and time-series patterns structural (e.g., tree, lattice, graph) patterns spatial (e.g., colocation) patterns temporal (evolutionary, periodic) patterns image, video, and multimedia patterns network patterns interestingness (subjective vs. objective) constraint-based mining correlation rules exception rules distributed/parallel mining incremental mining stream patterns approximate patterns uncertain patterns compressed patterns rare patterns/negative patterns high-dimensional and colossal patterns Basic Patterns Basic Mining Methods Multilevel and Multidimensional Patterns Extended Data Types Applications pattern-based classification pattern-based clustering pattern-based semantic annotation collaborative filtering privacy-preserving Kinds of Patterns and Rules Mining Methods Pattern Mining Research Mining Interesting Patterns Distributed, Parallel, and Incremental Extensions and Applications Extended Patterns Figure 7.1 A general road map on pattern mining research. Based on pattern diversity, pattern mining can be classiﬁed using the following criteria: Basic patterns: As discussed in Chapter 6, a frequent pattern may have several alter- native forms, including a simple frequent pattern, a closed pattern, or a max-pattern. To review, a frequent pattern is a pattern (or itemset) that satisﬁes a minimum sup- port threshold. A pattern p is a closed pattern if there is no superpattern p′ with the same support as p. Pattern p is a max-pattern if there exists no frequent superpattern of p. Frequent patterns can also be mapped into association rules, or other kinds of rules based on interestingness measures. Sometimes we may also be interested in infrequent or rare patterns (i.e., patterns that occur rarely but are of critical impor- tance, or negative patterns (i.e., patterns that reveal a negative correlation between items). 7.1 Pattern Mining: A Road Map 281 Based on the abstraction levels involved in a pattern: Patterns or association rules may have items or concepts residing at high, low, or multiple abstraction levels. For example, suppose that a set of association rules mined includes the following rules where X is a variable representing a customer: buys(X, “computer”) ⇒buys(X, “printer”) (7.1) buys(X, “laptop computer”) ⇒buys(X, “color laser printer”) (7.2) In Rules (7.1) and (7.2), the items bought are referenced at different abstraction levels (e.g., “computer” is a higher-level abstraction of “laptop computer,” and “color laser printer” is a lower-level abstraction of “printer”). We refer to the rule set mined as consisting of multilevel association rules. If, instead, the rules within a given set do not reference items or attributes at different abstraction levels, then the set contains single-level association rules. Based on the number