to single out values falling at least 1.5 × IQR above the third quartile or below the ﬁrst quartile. Because Q1, the median, and Q3 together contain no information about the end- points (e.g., tails) of the data, a fuller summary of the shape of a distribution can be obtained by providing the lowest and highest data values as well. This is known as the ﬁve-number summary. The ﬁve-number summary of a distribution consists of the median (Q2), the quartiles Q1 and Q3, and the smallest and largest individual obser- vations, written in the order of Minimum, Q1, Median, Q3, Maximum. Boxplots are a popular way of visualizing a distribution. A boxplot incorporates the ﬁve-number summary as follows: Typically, the ends of the box are at the quartiles so that the box length is the interquartile range. The median is marked by a line within the box. Two lines (called whiskers) outside the box extend to the smallest (Minimum) and largest (Maximum) observations. 50 Chapter 2 Getting to Know Your Data 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 Unit price ($) Branch 1 Branch 4 Branch 3 Branch 2 Figure 2.3 Boxplot for the unit price data for items sold at four branches of AllElectronics during a given time period. When dealing with a moderate number of observations, it is worthwhile to plot potential outliers individually. To do this in a boxplot, the whiskers are extended to the extreme low and high observations only if these values are less than 1.5 × IQR beyond the quartiles. Otherwise, the whiskers terminate at the most extreme observations occur- ring within 1.5 × IQR of the quartiles. The remaining cases are plotted individually. Boxplots can be used in the comparisons of several sets of compatible data. Example 2.11 Boxplot. Figure 2.3 shows boxplots for unit price data for items sold at four branches of AllElectronics during a given time period. For branch 1, we see that the median price of items sold is $80, Q1 is $60, and Q3 is $100. Notice that two outlying observations for this branch were plotted individually, as their values of 175 and 202 are more than 1.5 times the IQR here of 40. Boxplots can be computed in O(nlogn) time. Approximate boxplots can be com- puted in linear or sublinear time depending on the quality guarantee required. Variance and Standard Deviation Variance and standard deviation are measures of data dispersion. They indicate how spread out a data distribution is. A low standard deviation means that the data observa- tions tend to be very close to the mean, while a high standard deviation indicates that the data are spread out over a large range of values. 2.2 Basic Statistical Descriptions of Data 51 The variance of N observations, x1,x2,...,xN, for a numeric attribute X is σ 2 = 1 N N X i=1 (xi −¯x)2 = 1 N N X i=1 x2 i ! −¯x2, (2.6) where ¯x is the mean value of the observations, as deﬁned in Eq. (2.1). The standard deviation, σ, of the observations is the square root of the variance, σ 2. Example 2.12 Variance and standard deviation. In Example 2.6, we found ¯x = $58,000 using Eq. (2.1) for the mean. To determine the variance and standard deviation of the data from that example, we set N = 12 and use Eq. (2.6) to obtain σ 2 = 1 12(302 + 362 + 472 ... + 1102) −582 ≈379.17 σ ≈ √ 379.17 ≈19.47. The basic properties of the standard deviation, σ, as a measure of spread are as follows: σ measures spread about the mean and should be considered only when the mean is chosen as the measure of center. σ = 0 only when there is no spread, that is, when all observations have the same value. Otherwise, σ > 0. Importantly, an observation is unlikely to be more than several standard deviations away from the mean. Mathematically, using Chebyshev’s inequality, it can be shown that at least  1 −1 k2  × 100% of the observations are no more than k standard deviations from the mean. Therefore, the standard deviation is a good indicator of the spread of a data set. The computation of the variance and standard deviation is scalable in large databases. 2.2.3 Graphic Displays of Basic Statistical Descriptions of Data In this section, we study graphic displays of basic statistical descriptions. These include quantile plots, quantile–quantile plots, histograms, and scatter plots. Such graphs are help- ful for the visual inspection of data, which is useful for data preprocessing. The ﬁrst three of these show univariate distributions (i.e., data for one attribute), while scatter plots show bivariate distributions (i.e., involving two attributes). Quantile Plot In this and the following subsections, we cover common graphic displays of data distri- butions. A quantile plot is a simple and effective way to have a ﬁrst look at a univariate data distribution. First, it displays all of the data for the given attribute (allowing the user 52 Chapter 2 Getting to Know Your Data to assess both the overall behavior and unusual occurrences). Second, it plots quantile information (see Section 2.2.2). Let xi, for i = 1 to N, be the data sorted in increasing order so that x1 is the smallest observation and xN is the largest for some ordinal or numeric attribute X. Each observation, xi, is paired with a percentage, fi, which indicates that approximately fi × 100% of the data are below the value, xi. We say “approximately” because there may not be a value with exactly a fraction, fi, of the data below xi. Note that the 0.25 percentile corresponds to quartile Q1, the 0.50 percentile is the median, and the 0.75 percentile is Q3. Let fi = i −0.5 N . (2.7) These numbers increase in equal steps of 1/N, ranging from 1 2N (which is slightly above 0) to 1 −1 2N (which is slightly below 1). On a quantile plot, xi is graphed against fi. This allows us to compare different distributions based on their quantiles. For exam- ple, given the quantile plots of sales data for two different time periods, we can compare their Q1, median, Q3, and other fi values at a glance. Example 2.13 Quantile plot. Figure 2.4 shows a quantile plot for the unit price data of Table 2.1. Quantile–Quantile Plot A quantile–quantile plot, or q-q plot, graphs the quantiles of one univariate distribution against the corresponding quantiles of another. It is a powerful visualization tool in that it allows the user to view whether there is a shift in going from one distribution to another. Suppose that we have two sets of observations for the attribute or variable unit price, taken from two different branch locations. Let x1,...,xN be the data from the ﬁrst branch, and y1,...,yM be the data from the second, where each data set is sorted in increasing order. If M = N (i.e., the number of points in each set is the same), then we simply plot yi against xi, where yi and xi are both (i −0.5)/N quantiles of their respec- tive data sets. If M < N (i.e., the second branch has fewer observations than the ﬁrst), there can be only M points on the q-q plot. Here, yi is the (i −0.5)/M quantile of the y 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 f-value Unit price ($) Median Q1 Q3 Figure 2.4 A quantile plot for the unit price data of Table 2.1. 2.2 Basic Statistical Descriptions of Data 53 Table 2.1 A Set of Unit Price Data for Items Sold at a Branch of AllElectronics Unit price Count of ($) items sold 40 275 43 300 47 250 − − 74 360 75 515 78 540 − − 115 320 117 270 120 350 40 120 110 100 90 80 70 60 50 40 50 60 Median Q1 Q3 70 80 Branch 1 (unit price $) Branch 2 (unit price $) 90 100 110 120 Figure 2.5 A q-q plot for unit price data from two AllElectronics branches. data, which is plotted against the (i −0.5)/M quantile of the x data. This computation typically involves interpolation. Example 2.14 Quantile–quantile plot. Figure 2.5 shows a quantile–quantile plot for unit price data of items sold at two branches of AllElectronics during a given time period. Each point cor- responds to the same quantile for each data set and shows the unit price of items sold at branch 1 versus branch 2 for that quantile. (To aid in comparison, the straight line rep- resents the case where, for each given quantile, the unit price at each branch is the same. The darker points correspond to the data for Q1, the median, and Q3, respectively.) We see, for example, that at Q1, the unit price of items sold at branch 1 was slightly less than that at branch 2. In other words, 25% of items sold at branch 1 were less than or 54 Chapter 2 Getting to Know Your Data equal to $60, while 25% of items sold at branch 2 were less than or equal to $64. At the 50th percentile (marked by the median, which is also Q2), we see that 50% of items sold at branch 1 were less than $78, while 50% of items at branch 2 were less than $85. In general, we note that there is a shift in the distribution of branch 1 with respect to branch 2 in that the unit prices of items sold at branch 1 tend to be lower than those at branch 2. Histograms Histograms (or frequency histograms) are at least a century old and are widely used. “Histos” means pole or mast, and “gram” means chart, so a histogram is a chart of poles. Plotting histograms is a graphical method for summarizing the distribution of a given attribute, X. If X is nominal, such as automobile model or item type, then a pole or vertical bar is drawn for each known value of X. The height of the bar indicates the frequency (i.e., count) of that X value. The resulting graph is more commonly known as a bar chart. If X is numeric, the term histogram is preferred. The range of values for X is parti- tioned into disjoint consecutive subranges. The subranges, referred to as buckets or bins, are disjoint subsets of the data distribution for X. The range of a bucket is known as the width. Typically, the buckets are of equal width. For example, a price attribute with a value range of $1 to $200 (rounded up to the nearest dollar) can be partitioned into subranges 1 to 20, 21 to 40, 41 to 60, and so on. For each subrange, a bar is drawn with a height that represents the total count of items observed within the subrange. Histograms and partitioning rules are further discussed in Chapter 3 on data reduction. Example 2.15 Histogram. Figure 2.6 shows a histogram for the data set of Table 2.1, where buckets (or bins) are deﬁned by equal-width ranges representing $20 increments and the frequency is the count of items sold. Although histograms are widely used, they may not be as effective as the quantile plot, q-q plot, and boxplot methods in comparing groups of univariate observations. Scatter Plots and Data Correlation A scatter plot is one of the most effective graphical methods for determining if there appears to be a relationship, pattern, or trend between two numeric attributes. To con- struct a scatter plot, each pair of values is treated as a pair of coordinates in an algebraic sense and plotted as points in the plane. Figure 2.7 shows a scatter plot for the set of data in Table 2.1. The scatter plot is a useful method for providing a ﬁrst look at bivariate data to see clusters of points and outliers, or to explore the possibility of correlation relationships. Two attributes, X, and Y, are correlated if one attribute implies the other. Correlations can be positive, negative, or null (uncorrelated). Figure 2.8 shows examples of positive and negative correlations between two attributes. If the plotted points pattern slopes 2.2 Basic Statistical Descriptions of Data 55 6000 5000 4000 3000 2000 1000 0 Count of items sold 40–59 60–79 80–99 100–119 120–139 Unit price ($) Figure 2.6 A histogram for the Table 2.1 data set. Unit price ($) Items sold 0 700 600 500 400 300 200 100 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 Figure 2.7 A scatter plot for the Table 2.1 data set. (a) (b) Figure 2.8 Scatter plots can be used to ﬁnd (a) positive or (b) negative correlations between attributes. 56 Chapter 2 Getting to Know Your Data Figure 2.9 Three cases where there is no observed correlation between the two plotted attributes in each of the data sets. from lower left to upper right, this means that the values of X increase as the values of Y increase, suggesting a positive correlation (Figure 2.8a). If the pattern of plotted points slopes from upper left to lower right, the values of X increase as the values of Y decrease, suggesting a negative correlation (Figure 2.8b). A line of best ﬁt can be drawn to study the correlation between the variables. Statistical tests for correlation are given in Chapter 3 on data integration (Eq. (3.3)). Figure 2.9 shows three cases for which there is no correlation relationship between the two attributes in each of the given data sets. Section 2.3.2 shows how scatter plots can be extended to n attributes, resulting in a scatter-plot matrix. In conclusion, basic data descriptions (e.g., measures of central tendency and mea- sures of dispersion) and graphic statistical displays (e.g., quantile plots, histograms, and scatter plots) provide valuable insight into the overall behavior of your data. By helping to identify noise and outliers, they are especially useful for data cleaning. 2.3 Data Visualization How can we convey data to users effectively? Data visualization aims to communicate data clearly and effectively through graphical representation. Data visualization has been used extensively in many applications—for example, at work for reporting, managing business operations, and tracking progress of tasks. More popularly, we can take advan- tage of visualization techniques to discover data relationships that are otherwise not easily observable by looking at the raw data. Nowadays, people also use data visualization to create fun and interesting graphics. In this section, we brieﬂy introduce the basic concepts of data visualization. We start with multidimensional data such as those stored in relational databases. We discuss several representative approaches, including pixel-oriented techniques, geometric pro- jection techniques, icon-based techniques, and hierarchical and graph-based techniques. We then discuss the visualization of complex data and relations. 2.3 Data Visualization 57 2.3.1 Pixel-Oriented Visualization Techniques A simple way to visualize the value of a dimension is to use a pixel where the color of the pixel reﬂects the dimension’s value. For a data set of m dimensions, pixel-oriented techniques create m windows on the screen, one for each dimension. The m dimension values of a record are mapped to m pixels at the corresponding positions in the windows. The colors of the pixels reﬂect the corresponding values. Inside a window, the data values are arranged in some global order shared by all windows. The global order may be obtained by sorting all data records in a way that’s meaningful for the task at hand. Example 2.16 Pixel-oriented visualization. AllElectronics maintains a customer information table, which consists of four dimensions: income, credit limit, transaction volume, and age. Can we analyze the correlation between income and the other attributes by visualization? We can sort all customers in income-ascending order, and use this order to lay out the customer data in the four visualization windows, as shown in Figure 2.10. The pixel colors are chosen so that the smaller the value, the lighter the shading. Using pixel- based visualization, we can easily observe the following: credit limit increases as income increases; customers whose income is in the middle range are more likely to purchase more from AllElectronics; there is no clear correlation between income and age. In pixel-oriented techniques, data records can also be ordered in a query-dependent way. For example, given a point query, we can sort all records in descending order of similarity to the point query. Filling a window by laying out the data records in a linear way may not work well for a wide window. The ﬁrst pixel in a row is far away from the last pixel in the previous row, though they are next to each other in the global order. Moreover, a pixel is next to the one above it in the window, even though the two are not next to each other in the global order. To solve this problem, we can lay out the data records in a space-ﬁlling curve (a) income (b) credit_limit (c) transaction_volume (d) age Figure 2.10 Pixel-oriented visualization of four attributes by sorting all customers in income ascending order. 58 Chapter 2 Getting to Know Your Data (a) Hilbert curve (b) Gray code (c) Z-curve Figure 2.11 Some frequently used 2-D space-ﬁlling curves. Dim 6 Dim 3 Dim 4 Dim 2 Dim 5 Dim 1 One data record (a) Dim 1 Dim 2 Dim 3 Dim 4 Dim 5 Dim 6 (b) Figure 2.12 The circle segment technique. (a) Representing a data record in circle segments. (b) Laying out pixels in circle segments. to ﬁll the windows. A space-ﬁlling curve is a curve with a range that covers the entire n-dimensional unit hypercube. Since the visualization windows are 2-D, we can use any 2-D space-ﬁlling curve. Figure 2.11 shows some frequently used 2-D space-ﬁlling curves. Note that the windows do not have to be rectangular. For example, the circle segment technique uses windows in the shape of segments of a circle, as illustrated in Figure 2.12. This technique can ease the comparison of dimensions because the dimension windows are located side by side and form a circle. 2.3.2 Geometric Projection Visualization Techniques A drawback of pixel-oriented visualization techniques is that they cannot help us much in understanding the distribution of data in a multidimensional space. For example, they do not show whether there is a dense area in a multidimensional subspace. Geometric 2.3 Data Visualization 59 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 X Y Figure 2.13 Visualization of a 2-D data set using a scatter plot. Source: www.cs.sfu.ca/jpei/publications/ rareevent-geoinformatica06.pdf . projection techniques help users ﬁnd interesting projections of multidimensional data sets. The central challenge the geometric projection techniques try to address is how to visualize a high-dimensional space on a 2-D display. A scatter plot displays 2-D data points using Cartesian coordinates. A third dimen- sion can be added using different colors or shapes to represent different data points. Figure 2.13 shows an example, where X and Y are two spatial attributes and the third dimension is represented by different shapes. Through this visualization, we can see that points of types “+” and “×” tend to be colocated. A 3-D scatter plot uses three axes in a Cartesian coordinate system. If it also uses color, it can display up to 4-D data points (Figure 2.14). For data sets with more than four dimensions, scatter plots are usually ineffective. The scatter-plot matrix technique is a useful extension to the scatter plot. For an n- dimensional data set, a scatter-plot matrix is an n × n grid of 2-D scatter plots that provides a visualization of each dimension with every other dimension. Figure 2.15 shows an example, which visualizes the Iris data set. The data set consists of 450 sam- ples from each of three species of Iris ﬂowers. There are ﬁve dimensions in the data set: length and width of sepal and petal, and species. The scatter-plot matrix becomes less effective as the dimensionality increases. Another popular technique, called parallel coordinates, can handle higher dimensional- ity. To visualize n-dimensional data points, the parallel coordinates technique draws n equally spaced axes, one for each dimension, parallel to one of the display axes. 60 Chapter 2 Getting to Know Your Data Figure 2.14 Visualization of a 3-D data set using a scatter plot. Source: http://upload.wikimedia.org/ wikipedia/commons/c/c4/Scatter plot.jpg. A data record is represented by a polygonal line that intersects each axis at the point corresponding to the associated dimension value (Figure 2.16). A major limitation of the parallel coordinates technique is that it cannot effec- tively show a data set of many records. Even for a data set of several thousand records, visual clutter and overlap often reduce the readability of the visualization and make the patterns hard to ﬁnd. 2.3.3 Icon-Based Visualization Techniques Icon-based visualization techniques use small icons to represent multidimensional data values. We look at two popular icon-based techniques: Chernoff faces and stick ﬁgures. Chernoff faces were introduced in 1973 by statistician Herman Chernoff. They dis- play multidimensional data of up to 18 variables (or dimensions) as a cartoon human face (Figure 2.17). Chernoff faces help reveal trends in the data. Components of the face, such as the eyes, ears, mouth, and nose, represent values of the dimensions by their shape, size, placement, and orientation. For example, dimensions can be mapped to the following facial characteristics: eye size, eye spacing, nose length, nose width, mouth curvature, mouth width, mouth openness, pupil size, eyebrow slant, eye eccentricity, and head eccentricity. Chernoff faces make use of the ability of the human mind to recognize small dif- ferences in facial characteristics and to assimilate many facial characteristics at once. 2.3 Data Visualization 61 10 Sepal length (mm) Petal length (mm) Sepal width (mm) Petal width (mm) 30 50 70 0 10 20 80 70 60 50 40 45 40 35 30 25 20 40 50 60 70 80 20 Iris Species Setosa Versicolor Virginica 30 40 70 50 30 10 25 20 15 10 5 0 Figure 2.15 Visualization of the Iris data set using a scatter-plot matrix. Source: http://support.sas.com/ documentation/cdl/en/grstatproc/61948/HTML/default/images/gsgscmat.gif . Viewing large tables of data can be tedious. By condensing the data, Chernoff faces make the data easier for users to digest. In this way, they facilitate visualization of reg- ularities and irregularities present in the data, although their power in relating multiple relationships is limited. Another limitation is that speciﬁc data values are not shown. Furthermore, facial features vary in perceived importance. This means that the similarity of two faces (representing two multidimensional data points) can vary depending on the order in which dimensions are assigned to facial characteristics. Therefore, this mapping should be carefully chosen. Eye size and eyebrow slant have been found to be important. Asymmetrical Chernoff faces were proposed as an extension to the original technique. Since a face has vertical symmetry (along the y-axis), the left and right side of a face are identical, which wastes space. Asymmetrical Chernoff faces double the number of facial characteristics, thus allowing up to 36 dimensions to be displayed. The stick ﬁgure visualization technique maps multidimensional data to ﬁve-piece stick ﬁgures, where each ﬁgure has four limbs and a body. Two dimensions are mapped to the display (x and y) axes and the remaining dimensions are mapped to the angle 62 Chapter 2 Getting to Know Your Data 10 y 5 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 –5 –10 x Figure 2.16 Here is a visualization that uses parallel coordinates. Source: www.stat.columbia.edu/∼cook/ movabletype/archives/2007/10/parallel coordi.thml. Figure 2.17 Chernoff faces. Each face represents an n-dimensional data point (n ≤18). and/or length of the limbs. Figure 2.18 shows census data, where age and income are mapped to the display axes, and the remaining dimensions (gender, education, and so on) are mapped to stick ﬁgures. If the data items are relatively dense with respect to the two display dimensions, the resulting visualization shows texture patterns, reﬂecting data trends. 2.3 Data Visualization 63 income age Figure 2.18 Census data represented using stick ﬁgures. Source: Professor G. Grinstein, Department of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts at Lowell. 2.3.4 Hierarchical Visualization Techniques The visualization techniques discussed so far focus on visualizing multiple dimensions simultaneously. However, for a large data set of high dimensionality, it would be difﬁ- cult to visualize all dimensions at the same time. Hierarchical visualization techniques partition all dimensions into subsets (i.e., subspaces). The subspaces are visualized in a hierarchical manner. “Worlds-within-Worlds,” also known as n-Vision, is a representative hierarchical visualization method. Suppose we want to visualize a 6-D data set, where the dimensions are F,X1,...,X5. We want to observe how dimension F changes with respect to the other dimensions. We can ﬁrst ﬁx the values of dimensions X3,X4,X5 to some selected values, say, c3,c4,c5. We can then visualize F,X1,X2 using a 3-D plot, called a world, as shown in Figure 2.19. The position of the origin of the inner world is located at the point (c3,c4,c5) in the outer world, which is another 3-D plot using dimensions X3,X4,X5. A user can interactively change, in the outer world, the location of the origin of the inner world. The user then views the resulting changes of the inner world. Moreover, a user can vary the dimensions used in the inner world and the outer world. Given more dimensions, more levels of worlds can be used, which is why the method is called “worlds-within- worlds.” As another example of hierarchical visualization methods, tree-maps display hier- archical data as a set of nested rectangles. For example, Figure 2.20 shows a tree-map visualizing Google news stories. All news stories are organized into seven categories, each shown in a large rectangle of a unique color. Within each category (i.e., each rectangle at the top level), the news stories are further partitioned into smaller subcategories. 64 Chapter 2 Getting to Know Your Data Figure 2.19 “Worlds-within-Worlds” (also known as n-Vision). Source: http://graphics.cs.columbia.edu/ projects/AutoVisual/images/1.dipstick.5.gif. 2.3.5 Visualizing Complex Data and Relations In early days, visualization techniques were mainly for numeric data. Recently, more and more non-numeric data, such as text and social networks, have become available. Visualizing and analyzing such data attracts a lot of interest. There are many new visualization techniques dedicated to these kinds of data. For example, many people on the Web tag various objects such as pictures, blog entries, and product reviews. A tag cloud is a visualization of statistics of user-generated tags. Often, in a tag cloud, tags are listed alphabetically or in a user-preferred order. The importance of a tag is indicated by font size or color. Figure 2.21 shows a tag cloud for visualizing the popular tags used in a Web site. Tag clouds are often used in two ways. First, in a tag cloud for a single item, we can use the size of a tag to represent the number of times that the tag is applied to this item by different users. Second, when visualizing the tag statistics on multiple items, we can use the size of a tag to represent the number of items that the tag has been applied to, that is, the popularity of the tag. In addition to complex data, complex relations among data entries also raise chal- lenges for visualization. For example, Figure 2.22 uses a disease inﬂuence graph to visualize the correlations between diseases. The nodes in the graph are diseases, and the size of each node is proportional to the prevalence of the corresponding disease. Two nodes are linked by an edge if the corresponding diseases have a strong correlation. The width of an edge is proportional to the strength of the correlation pattern of the two corresponding diseases. 2.4 Measuring Data Similarity and Dissimilarity 65 Figure 2.20 Newsmap: Use of tree-maps to visualize Google news headline stories. Source: www.cs.umd. edu/class/spring2005/cmsc838s/viz4all/ss/newsmap.png. In summary, visualization provides effective tools to explore data. We have intro- duced several popular methods and the essential ideas behind them. There are many existing tools and methods. Moreover, visualization can be used in data mining in vari- ous aspects. In addition to visualizing data, visualization can be used to represent the data mining process, the patterns obtained from a mining method, and user interaction with the data. Visual data mining is an important research and development direction. 2.4 Measuring Data Similarity and Dissimilarity In data mining applications, such as clustering, outlier analysis, and nearest-neighbor classiﬁcation, we need ways to assess how alike or unalike objects are in comparison to one another. For example, a store may want to search for clusters of customer objects, resulting in groups of customers with similar characteristics (e.g., similar income, area of residence, and age). Such information can then be used for marketing. A cluster is 66 Chapter 2 Getting to Know Your Data Figure 2.21 Using a tag cloud to visualize popular Web site tags. Source: A snapshot of www.ﬂickr.com/ photos/tags/, January 23, 2010. High blood pressure (Hb) Allergies (Al) Overweight (Ov) High cholesterol level (Hc) Arthritis (Ar) Trouble seeing (Tr) Risk of diabetes (Ri) Asthma (As) Diabetes (Di) Hayfever (Ha) Thyroid problem (Th) Heart disease (He) Cancer (Cn) Sleep disorder (Sl) Eczema (Ec) Chronic bronchitis (Ch) Osteoporosis (Os) Prostate (Pr) Cardiovascular (Ca) Glaucoma (Gl) Stroke (St) Liver condition (Li) Li Ki En Ca Th He Em Os Cn Pr PS Ec Sl Gl Di Ar Hb Tr Ov Al As Ch Li St Ri Ha Hc PSA test abnormal (PS) Kidney (Ki) Endometriosis (En) Emphysema (Em) Figure 2.22 Disease inﬂuence graph of people at least 20 years old in the NHANES data set. a collection of data objects such that the objects within a cluster are similar to one another and dissimilar to the objects in other clusters. Outlier analysis also employs clustering-based techniques to identify potential outliers as objects that are highly dis- similar to others. Knowledge of object similarities can also be used in nearest-neighbor classiﬁcation schemes where a given object (e.g., a patient) is assigned a class label (relating to, say, a diagnosis) based on its similarity toward other objects in the model. 2.4 Measuring Data Similarity and Dissimilarity 67 This section presents similarity and dissimilarity measures, which are referred to as measures of proximity. Similarity and dissimilarity are related. A similarity measure for two objects, i and j, will typically return the value 0 if the objects are unalike. The higher the similarity value, the greater the similarity between objects. (Typically, a value of 1 indicates complete similarity, that is, the objects are identical.) A dissimilarity measure works the opposite way. It returns a value of 0 if the objects are the same (and therefore, far from being dissimilar). The higher the dissimilarity value, the more dissimilar the two objects are. In Section 2.4.1 we present two data structures that are commonly used in the above types of applications: the data matrix (used to store the data objects) and the dissimilarity matrix (used to store dissimilarity values for pairs of objects). We also switch to a different notation for data objects than previously used in this chapter since now we are dealing with objects described by more than one attribute. We then discuss how object dissimilarity can be computed for objects described by nominal attributes (Section 2.4.2), by binary attributes (Section 2.4.3), by numeric attributes (Section 2.4.4), by ordinal attributes (Section 2.4.5), or by combinations of these attribute types (Section 2.4.6). Section 2.4.7 provides similarity measures for very long and sparse data vectors, such as term-frequency vectors representing documents in information retrieval. Knowing how to compute dissimilarity is useful in studying attributes and will also be referenced in later topics on clustering (Chapters 10 and 11), outlier analysis (Chapter 12), and nearest-neighbor classiﬁcation (Chapter 9). 2.4.1 Data Matrix versus Dissimilarity Matrix In Section 2.2, we looked at ways of studying the central tendency, dispersion, and spread of observed values for some attribute X. Our objects there were one-dimensional, that is, described by a single attribute. In this section, we talk about objects described by mul- tiple attributes. Therefore, we need a change in notation. Suppose that we have n objects (e.g., persons, items, or courses) described by p attributes (also called measurements or features, such as age, height, weight, or gender). The objects are x1 = (x11,x12,...,x1p), x2 = (x21,x22,...,x2p), and so on, where xij is the value for object xi of the jth attribute. For brevity, we hereafter refer to object xi as object i. The objects may be tuples in a relational database, and are also referred to as data samples or feature vectors. Main memory-based clustering and nearest-neighbor algorithms typically operate on either of the following two data structures: Data matrix (or object-by-attribute structure): This structure stores the n data objects in the form of a relational table, or n-by-p matrix (n objects ×p attributes):   x11 ··· x1f ··· x1p ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· xi1 ··· xif ··· xip ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· xn1 ··· xnf ··· xnp   . (2.8) 68 Chapter 2 Getting to Know Your Data Each row corresponds to an object. As part of our notation, we may use f to index through the p attributes. Dissimilarity matrix (or object-by-object structure): This structure stores a collection of proximities that are available for all pairs of n objects. It is often represented by an n-by-n table:   0 d(2, 1) 0 d(3, 1) d(3, 2) 0 ... ... ... d(n, 1) d(n, 2) ··· ··· 0   , (2.9) where d(i, j) is the measured dissimilarity or “difference” between objects i and j. In general, d(i, j) is a non-negative number that is close to 0 when objects i and j are highly similar or “near” each other, and becomes larger the more they differ. Note that d(i, i) = 0; that is, the difference between an object and itself is 0. Furthermore, d(i, j) = d(j, i). (For readability, we do not show the d(j, i) entries; the matrix is symmetric.) Measures of dissimilarity are discussed throughout the remainder of this chapter. Measures of similarity can often be expressed as a function of measures of dissimilarity. For example, for nominal data, sim(i, j) = 1 −d(i, j), (2.10) where sim(i, j) is the similarity between objects i and j. Throughout the rest of this chapter, we will also comment on measures of similarity. A data matrix is made up of two entities or “things,” namely rows (for objects) and columns (for attributes). Therefore, the data matrix is often called a two-mode matrix. The dissimilarity matrix contains one kind of entity (dissimilarities) and so is called a one-mode matrix. Many clustering and nearest-neighbor algorithms operate on a dissimilarity matrix. Data in the form of a data matrix can be transformed into a dissimilarity matrix before applying such algorithms. 2.4.2 Proximity Measures for Nominal Attributes A nominal attribute can take on two or more states (Section 2.1.2). For example, map color is a nominal attribute that may have, say, ﬁve states: red, yellow, green, pink, and blue. Let the number of states of a nominal attribute be M. The states can be denoted by letters, symbols, or a set of integers, such as 1, 2,..., M. Notice that such integers are used just for data handling and do not represent any speciﬁc ordering. 2.4 Measuring Data Similarity and Dissimilarity 69 “How is dissimilarity computed between objects described by nominal attributes?” The dissimilarity between two objects i and j can be computed based on the ratio of mismatches: d(i, j) = p −m p , (2.11) where m is the number of matches (i.e., the number of attributes for which i and j are in the same state), and p is the total number of attributes describing the objects. Weights can be assigned to increase the effect of m or to assign greater weight to the matches in attributes having a larger number of states. Example 2.17 Dissimilarity between nominal attributes. Suppose that we have the sample data of Table 2.2, except that only the object-identiﬁer and the attribute test-1 are available, where test-1 is nominal. (We will use test-2 and test-3 in later examples.) Let’s compute the dissimilarity matrix (Eq. 2.9), that is,   0 d(2, 1) 0 d(3, 1) d(3, 2) 0 d(4, 1) d(4, 2) d(4, 3) 0  . Since here we have one nominal attribute, test-1, we set p = 1 in Eq. (2.11) so that d(i, j) evaluates to 0 if objects i and j match, and 1 if the objects differ. Thus, we get   0 1 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 0  . From this, we see that all objects are dissimilar except objects 1 and 4 (i.e., d(4,1) = 0). Table 2.2 A Sample Data Table Containing Attributes of Mixed Type Object test-1 test-2 test-3 Identiﬁer (nominal) (ordinal) (numeric) 1 code A excellent 45 2 code B fair 22 3 code C good 64 4 code A excellent 28 70 Chapter 2 Getting to Know Your Data Alternatively, similarity can be computed as sim(i, j) = 1 −d(i, j) = m p . (2.12) Proximity between objects described by nominal attributes can be computed using an alternative encoding scheme. Nominal attributes can be encoded using asymmetric binary attributes by creating a new binary attribute for each of the M states. For an object with a given state value, the binary attribute representing that state is set to 1, while the remaining binary attributes are set to 0. For example, to encode the nominal attribute map color, a binary attribute can be created for each of the ﬁve colors previ- ously listed. For an object having the color yellow, the yellow attribute is set to 1, while the remaining four attributes are set to 0. Proximity measures for this form of encoding can be calculated using the methods discussed in the next subsection. 2.4.3 Proximity Measures for Binary Attributes Let’s look at dissimilarity and similarity measures for objects described by either symmetric or asymmetric binary attributes. Recall that a binary attribute has only one of two states: 0 and 1, where 0 means that the attribute is absent, and 1 means that it is present (Section 2.1.3). Given the attribute smoker describing a patient, for instance, 1 indicates that the patient smokes, while 0 indicates that the patient does not. Treating binary attributes as if they are numeric can be misleading. Therefore, methods speciﬁc to binary data are necessary for computing dissimilarity. “So, how can we compute the dissimilarity between two binary attributes?” One approach involves computing a dissimilarity matrix from the given binary data. If all binary attributes are thought of as having the same weight, we have the 2 × 2 contin- gency table of Table 2.3, where q is the number of attributes that equal 1 for both objects i and j, r is the number of attributes that equal 1 for object i but equal 0 for object j, s is the number of attributes that equal 0 for object i but equal 1 for object j, and t is the number of attributes that equal 0 for both objects i and j. The total number of attributes is p, where p = q + r + s + t. Recall that for symmetric binary attributes, each state is equally valuable. Dis- similarity that is based on symmetric binary attributes is called symmetric binary dissimilarity. If objects i and j are described by symmetric binary attributes, then the Table 2.3 Contingency Table for Binary Attributes Object j 1 0 sum 1 q r q + r Object i 0 s t s + t sum q + s r + t p 2.4 Measuring Data Similarity and Dissimilarity 71 dissimilarity between i and j is d(i, j) = r + s q + r + s + t . (2.13) For asymmetric binary attributes, the two states are not equally important, such as the positive (1) and negative (0) outcomes of a disease test. Given two asymmetric binary attributes, the agreement of two 1s (a positive match) is then considered more signiﬁ- cant than that of two 0s (a negative match). Therefore, such binary attributes are often considered “monary” (having one state). The dissimilarity based on these attributes is called asymmetric binary dissimilarity, where the number of negative matches, t, is considered unimportant and is thus ignored in the following computation: d(i, j) = r + s q + r + s . (2.14) Complementarily, we can measure the difference between two binary attributes based on the notion of similarity instead of dissimilarity. For example, the asymmetric binary similarity between the objects i and j can be computed as sim(i, j) = q q + r + s = 1 −d(i, j). (2.15) The coefﬁcient sim(i, j) of Eq. (2.15) is called the Jaccard coefﬁcient and is popularly referenced in the literature. When both symmetric and asymmetric binary attributes occur in the same data set, the mixed attributes approach described in Section 2.4.6 can be applied. Example 2.18 Dissimilarity between binary attributes. Suppose that a patient record table (Table 2.4) contains the attributes name, gender, fever, cough, test-1, test-2, test-3, and test-4, where name is an object identiﬁer, gender is a symmetric attribute, and the remaining attributes are asymmetric binary. For asymmetric attribute values, let the values Y (yes) and P (positive) be set to 1, and the value N (no or negative) be set to 0. Suppose that the distance between objects Table 2.4 Relational Table Where Patients Are Described by Binary Attributes name gender fever cough test-1 test-2 test-3 test-4 Jack M Y N P N N N Jim M Y Y N N N N Mary F Y N P N P N ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 72 Chapter 2 Getting to Know Your Data (patients) is computed based only on the asymmetric attributes. According to Eq. (2.14), the distance between each pair of the three patients—Jack, Mary, and Jim—is d(Jack, Jim) = 1 + 1 1 + 1 + 1 = 0.67, d(Jack, Mary) = 0 + 1 2 + 0 + 1 = 0.33, d(Jim, Mary) = 1 + 2 1 + 1 + 2 = 0.75. These measurements suggest that Jim and Mary are unlikely to have a similar disease because they have the highest dissimilarity value among the three pairs. Of the three patients, Jack and Mary are the most likely to have a similar disease. 2.4.4 Dissimilarity of Numeric Data: Minkowski Distance In this section, we describe distance measures that are commonly used for computing the dissimilarity of objects described by numeric attributes. These measures include the Euclidean, Manhattan, and Minkowski distances. In some cases, the data are normalized before applying distance calculations. This involves transforming the data to fall within a smaller or common range, such as [−1,1] or [0.0, 1.0]. Consider a height attribute, for example, which could be measured in either meters or inches. In general, expressing an attribute in smaller units will lead to a larger range for that attribute, and thus tend to give such attributes greater effect or “weight.” Normalizing the data attempts to give all attributes an equal weight. It may or may not be useful in a particular application. Methods for normalizing data are discussed in detail in Chapter 3 on data preprocessing. The most popular distance measure is Euclidean distance (i.e., straight line or “as the crow ﬂies”). Let i = (xi1, xi2,..., xip) and j = (xj1, xj2,..., xjp) be two objects described by p numeric attributes. The Euclidean distance between objects i and j is deﬁned as d(i, j) = q (xi1 −xj1)2 + (xi2 −xj2)2 + ··· + (xip −xjp)2. (2.16) Another well-known measure is the Manhattan (or city block) distance, named so because it is the distance in blocks between any two points in a city (such as 2 blocks down and 3 blocks over for a total of 5 blocks). It is deﬁned as d(i, j) = |xi1 −xj1| + |xi2 −xj2| + ··· + |xip −xjp|. (2.17) Both the Euclidean and the Manhattan distance satisfy the following mathematical properties: Non-negativity: d(i, j) ≥0: Distance is a non-negative number. Identity of indiscernibles: d(i, i) = 0: The distance of an object to itself is 0. 2.4 Measuring Data Similarity and Dissimilarity 73 Symmetry: d(i, j) = d(j, i): Distance is a symmetric function. Triangle inequality: d(i, j) ≤d(i, k) + d(k, j): Going directly from object i to object j in space is no more than making a detour over any other object k. A measure that satisﬁes these conditions is known as metric. Please note that the non-negativity property is implied by the other three properties. Example 2.19 Euclidean distance and Manhattan distance. Let x1 = (1, 2) and x2 = (3, 5) repre- sent two objects as shown in Figure 2.23. The Euclidean distance between the two is √ 22 + 32 = 3.61. The Manhattan distance between the two is 2 + 3 = 5. Minkowski distance is a generalization of the Euclidean and Manhattan distances. It is deﬁned as d(i, j) = hq |xi1 −xj1|h + |xi2 −xj2|h + ··· + |xip −xjp|h, (2.18) where h is a real number such that h ≥1. (Such a distance is also called Lp norm in some literature, where the symbol p refers to our notation of h. We have kept p as the number of attributes to be consistent with the rest of this chapter.) It represents the Manhattan distance when h = 1 (i.e., L1 norm) and Euclidean distance when h = 2 (i.e., L2 norm). The supremum distance (also referred to as Lmax, L∞norm and as the Chebyshev distance) is a generalization of the Minkowski distance for h →∞. To compute it, we ﬁnd the attribute f that gives the maximum difference in values between the two objects. This difference is the supremum distance, deﬁned more formally as: d(i, j) = lim h→∞   p X f =1 |xif −xjf |h   1 h = p max f |xif −xjf |. (2.19) The L∞norm is also known as the uniform norm. 1 2 2 3 5 4 3 3 2 1 x2 = (3,5) x1 = (1,2) Euclidean distance = (22 + 32)1/2 = 3.61 Manhattan distance = 2 + 3 = 5 Supremum distance = 5 – 2 = 3 Figure 2.23 Euclidean, Manhattan, and supremum distances between two objects. 74 Chapter 2 Getting to Know Your Data Example 2.20 Supremum distance. Let’s use the same two objects, x1 = (1, 2) and x2 = (3, 5), as in Figure 2.23. The second attribute gives the greatest difference between values for the objects, which is 5 −2 = 3. This is the supremum distance between both objects. If each attribute is assigned a weight according to its perceived importance, the weighted Euclidean distance can be computed as d(i, j) = q w1|xi1 −xj1|2 + w2|xi2 −xj2|2 + ··· + wm|xip −xjp|2. (2.20) Weighting can also be applied to other distance measures as well. 2.4.5 Proximity Measures for Ordinal Attributes The values of an ordinal attribute have a meaningful order or ranking about them, yet the magnitude between successive values is unknown (Section 2.1.4). An exam- ple includes the sequence small, medium, large for a size attribute. Ordinal attributes may also be obtained from the discretization of numeric attributes by splitting the value range into a ﬁnite number of categories. These categories are organized into ranks. That is, the range of a numeric attribute can be mapped to an ordinal attribute f having Mf states. For example, the range of the interval-scaled attribute temperature (in Celsius) can be organized into the following states: −30 to −10, −10 to 10, 10 to 30, repre- senting the categories cold temperature, moderate temperature, and warm temperature, respectively. Let M represent the number of possible states that an ordinal attribute can have. These ordered states deﬁne the ranking 1,..., Mf . “How are ordinal attributes handled?” The treatment of ordinal attributes is quite similar to that of numeric attributes when computing dissimilarity between objects. Suppose that f is an attribute from a set of ordinal attributes describing n objects. The dissimilarity computation with respect to f involves the following steps: 1. The value of f for the ith object is xif , and f has Mf ordered states, representing the ranking 1,..., Mf . Replace each xif by its corresponding rank, rif ∈{1,..., Mf }. 2. Since each ordinal attribute can have a different number of states, it is often necessary to map the range of each attribute onto [0.0, 1.0] so that each attribute has equal weight. We perform such data normalization by replacing the rank rif of the ith object in the f th attribute by zif = rif −1 Mf −1. (2.21) 3. Dissimilarity can then be computed using any of the distance measures described in Section 2.4.4 for numeric attributes, using zif to represent the f value for the ith object. 2.4 Measuring Data Similarity and Dissimilarity 75 Example 2.21 Dissimilarity between ordinal attributes. Suppose that we have the sample data shown earlier in Table 2.2, except that this time only the object-identiﬁer and the continuous ordinal attribute, test-2, are available. There are three states for test-2: fair, good, and excellent, that is, Mf = 3. For step 1, if we replace each value for test-2 by its rank, the four objects are assigned the ranks 3, 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Step 2 normalizes the ranking by mapping rank 1 to 0.0, rank 2 to 0.5, and rank 3 to 1.0. For step 3, we can use, say, the Euclidean distance (Eq. 2.16), which results in the following dissimilarity matrix:   0 1.0 0 0.5 0.5 0 0 1.0 0.5 0  . Therefore, objects 1 and 2 are the most dissimilar, as are objects 2 and 4 (i.e., d(2,1) = 1.0 and d(4,2) = 1.0). This makes intuitive sense since objects 1 and 4 are both excellent. Object 2 is fair, which is at the opposite end of the range of values for test-2. Similarity values for ordinal attributes can be interpreted from dissimilarity as sim(i,j) = 1 −d(i,j). 2.4.6 Dissimilarity for Attributes of Mixed Types Sections 2.4.2 through 2.4.5 discussed how to compute the dissimilarity between objects described by attributes of the same type, where these types may be either nominal, sym- metric binary, asymmetric binary, numeric, or ordinal. However, in many real databases, objects are described by a mixture of attribute types. In general, a database can contain all of these attribute types. “So, how can we compute the dissimilarity between objects of mixed attribute types?” One approach is to group each type of attribute together, performing separate data mining (e.g., clustering) analysis for each type. This is feasible if these analyses derive compatible results. However, in real applications, it is unlikely that a separate analysis per attribute type will generate compatible results. A more preferable approach is to process all attribute types together, performing a single analysis. One such technique combines the different attributes into a single dis- similarity matrix, bringing all of the meaningful attributes onto a common scale of the interval [0.0, 1.0]. Suppose that the data set contains p attributes of mixed type. The dissimilarity d(i, j) between objects i and j is deﬁned as d(i, j) = Pp f =1 δ(f ) ij d(f ) ij Pp f =1 δ(f ) ij , (2.22) 76 Chapter 2 Getting to Know Your Data where the indicator δ(f ) ij = 0 if either (1) xif or xjf is missing (i.e., there is no mea- surement of attribute f for object i or object j), or (2) xif = xjf = 0 and attribute f is asymmetric binary; otherwise, δ(f ) ij = 1. The contribution of attribute f to the dissimilarity between i and j (i.e., d(f ) ij ) is computed dependent on its type: If f is numeric: d(f ) ij = |xif −xjf | maxhxhf −minhxhf , where h runs over all nonmissing objects for attribute f . If f is nominal or binary: d(f ) ij = 0 if xif = xjf ; otherwise, d(f ) ij = 1. If f is ordinal: compute the ranks rif and zif = rif −1 Mf −1, and treat zif as numeric. These steps are identical to what we have already seen for each of the individual attribute types. The only difference is for numeric attributes, where we normalize so that the values map to the interval [0.0, 1.0]. Thus, the dissimilarity between objects can be computed even when the attributes describing the objects are of different types. Example 2.22 Dissimilarity between attributes of mixed type. Let’s compute a dissimilarity matrix for the objects in Table 2.2. Now we will consider all of the attributes, which are of different types. In Examples 2.17 and 2.21, we worked out the dissimilarity matrices for each of the individual attributes. The procedures we followed for test-1 (which is nominal) and test-2 (which is ordinal) are the same as outlined earlier for processing attributes of mixed types. Therefore, we can use the dissimilarity matrices obtained for test-1 and test-2 later when we compute Eq. (2.22). First, however, we need to compute the dissimilarity matrix for the third attribute, test-3 (which is numeric). That is, we must compute d(3) ij . Following the case for numeric attributes, we let maxhxh = 64 and minhxh = 22. The difference between the two is used in Eq. (2.22) to normalize the values of the dissimilarity matrix. The resulting dissimilarity matrix for test-3 is   0 0.55 0 0.45 1.00 0 0.40 0.14 0.86 0  . We can now use the dissimilarity matrices for the three attributes in our computation of Eq. (2.22). The indicator δ(f ) ij = 1 for each of the three attributes, f . We get, for example, d(3, 1) = 1(1)+1(0.50)+1(0.45) 3 = 0.65. The resulting dissimilarity matrix obtained for the 2.4 Measuring Data Similarity and Dissimilarity 77 data described by the three attributes of mixed types is:   0 0.85 0 0.65 0.83 0 0.13 0.71 0.79 0  . From Table 2.2, we can intuitively guess that objects 1 and 4 are the most similar, based on their values for test-1 and test-2. This is conﬁrmed by the dissimilarity matrix, where d(4, 1) is the lowest value for any pair of different objects. Similarly, the matrix indicates that objects 1 and 2 are the least similar. 2.4.7 Cosine Similarity A document can be represented by thousands of attributes, each recording the frequency of a particular word (such as a keyword) or phrase in the document. Thus, each docu- ment is an object represented by what is called a term-frequency vector. For example, in Table 2.5, we see that Document1 contains ﬁve instances of the word team, while hockey occurs three times. The word coach is absent from the entire document, as indicated by a count value of 0. Such data can be highly asymmetric. Term-frequency vectors are typically very long and sparse (i.e., they have many 0 val- ues). Applications using such structures include information retrieval, text document clustering, biological taxonomy, and gene feature mapping. The traditional distance measures that we have studied in this chapter do not work well for such sparse numeric data. For example, two term-frequency vectors may have many 0 values in common, meaning that the corresponding documents do not share many words, but this does not make them similar. We need a measure that will focus on the words that the two docu- ments do have in common, and the occurrence frequency of such words. In other words, we need a measure for numeric data that ignores zero-matches. Cosine similarity is a measure of similarity that can be used to compare docu- ments or, say, give a ranking of documents with respect to a given vector of query words. Let x and y be two vectors for comparison. Using the cosine measure as a Table 2.5 Document Vector or Term-Frequency Vector Document team coach hockey baseball soccer penalty score win loss season Document1 5 0 3 0 2 0 0 2 0 0 Document2 3 0 2 0 1 1 0 1 0 1 Document3 0 7 0 2 1 0 0 3 0 0 Document4 0 1 0 0 1 2 2 0 3 0 78 Chapter 2 Getting to Know Your Data similarity function, we have sim(x, y) = x · y ||x||||y||, (2.23) where ||x|| is the Euclidean norm of vector x = (x1, x2,..., xp), deﬁned as q x2 1 + x2 2 + ··· + x2p. Conceptually, it is the length of the vector. Similarly, ||y|| is the Euclidean norm of vector y. The measure computes the cosine of the angle between vec-