see Breslow and Aha [BA97]. Thorough presentations of Bayesian classiﬁcation can be found in Duda, Hart, and Stork [DHS01], Weiss and Kulikowski [WK91], and Mitchell [Mit97]. For an anal- ysis of the predictive power of na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁers when the class-conditional independence assumption is violated, see Domingos and Pazzani [DP96]. Experiments with kernel density estimation for continuous-valued attributes, rather than Gaussian estimation, have been reported for na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁers in John [Joh97]. There are several examples of rule-based classiﬁers. These include AQ15 (Hong, Mozetic, and Michalski [HMM86]), CN2 (Clark and Niblett [CN89]), ITRULE (Smyth and Goodman [SG92]), RISE (Domingos [Dom94]), IREP (Furnkranz and Widmer [FW94]), RIPPER (Cohen [Coh95]), FOIL (Quinlan and Cameron-Jones [Qui90, QC-J93]), and Swap-1 (Weiss and Indurkhya [WI98]). Rule-based classiﬁers that are based on frequent-pattern mining are described in Chapter 9. For the extraction of rules from decision trees, see Quinlan [Qui87, Qui93]. Rule reﬁnement strategies that identify the most interesting rules among a given rule set can be found in Major and Mangano [MM95]. Issues involved in estimating classiﬁer accuracy are described in Weiss and Kulikowski [WK91] and Witten and Frank [WF05]. Sensitivity, speciﬁcity, and precision are dis- cussed in most information retrieval textbooks. For the F and Fβ measures, see van Rijsbergen [vR90]. The use of stratiﬁed 10-fold cross-validation for estimating classi- ﬁer accuracy is recommended over the holdout, cross-validation, leave-one-out (Stone [Sto74]), and bootstrapping (Efron and Tibshirani [ET93]) methods, based on a 8.9 Bibliographic Notes 391 theoretical and empirical study by Kohavi [Koh95]. See Freedman, Pisani, and Purves [FPP07] for the conﬁdence limits and statistical tests of signiﬁcance. For ROC analysis, see Egan [Ega75], Swets [Swe88], and Vuk and Curk [VC06]. Bag- ging is proposed in Breiman [Bre96]. Freund and Schapire [FS97] proposed AdaBoost. This boosting technique has been applied to several different classiﬁers, including deci- sion tree induction (Quinlan [Qui96]) and na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁcation (Elkan [Elk97]). Friedman [Fri01] proposed the gradient boosting machine for regression. The ensem- ble technique of random forests is described by Breiman [Bre01]. Seni and Elder [SE10] proposed the Importance Sampling Learning Ensembles (ISLE) framework, which views bagging, AdaBoost, random forests, and gradient boosting as special cases of a generic ensemble generation procedure. Friedman and Popescu [FB08, FP05] present Rule Ensembles, an ISLE-based model where the classiﬁers combined are composed of simple readable rules. Such ensembles were observed to have comparable or greater accuracy and greater interpretability. There are many online software packages for ensemble routines, including bagging, AdaBoost, gradient boosting, and random forests. Studies on the class imbalance problem and/or cost-sensitive learning include Weiss [Wei04], Zhou and Liu [ZL06], Zapkowicz and Stephen [ZS02], Elkan [Elk01], and Domingos [Dom99]. The University of California at Irvine (UCI) maintains a Machine Learning Repos- itory of data sets for the development and testing of classiﬁcation algorithms. It also maintains a Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD) Archive, an online repository of large data sets that encompasses a wide variety of data types, analysis tasks, and appli- cation areas. For information on these two repositories, see www.ics.uci.edu/∼mlearn/ MLRepository.html and http://kdd.ics.uci.edu. No classiﬁcation method is superior to all others for all data types and domains. Empirical comparisons of classiﬁcation methods include Quinlan [Qui88]; Shavlik, Mooney, and Towell [SMT91]; Brown, Corruble, and Pittard [BCP93]; Curram and Mingers [CM94]; Michie, Spiegelhalter, and Taylor [MST94]; Brodley and Utgoff [BU95]; and Lim, Loh, and Shih [LLS00]. This page intentionally left blank 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods In this chapter, you will learn advanced techniques for data classiﬁcation. We start with Bayesian belief networks (Section 9.1), which unlike na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁers, do not assume class conditional independence. Backpropagation, a neural network algorithm, is discussed in Section 9.2. In general terms, a neural network is a set of connected input/output units in which each connection has a weight associated with it. The weights are adjusted during the learning phase to help the network predict the correct class label of the input tuples. A more recent approach to classiﬁcation known as support vector machines is presented in Section 9.3. A support vector machine transforms training data into a higher dimension, where it ﬁnds a hyperplane that separates the data by class using essential training tuples called support vectors. Section 9.4 describes classi- ﬁcation using frequent patterns, exploring relationships between attribute–value pairs that occur frequently in data. This methodology builds on research on frequent pattern mining (Chapters 6 and 7). Section 9.5 presents lazy learners or instance-based methods of classiﬁcation, such as nearest-neighbor classiﬁers and case-based reasoning classiﬁers, which store all of the training tuples in pattern space and wait until presented with a test tuple before perform- ing generalization. Other approaches to classiﬁcation, such as genetic algorithms, rough sets, and fuzzy logic techniques, are introduced in Section 9.6. Section 9.7 introduces additional topics in classiﬁcation, including multiclass classiﬁcation, semi-supervised classiﬁcation, active learning, and transfer learning. 9.1 Bayesian Belief Networks Chapter 8 introduced Bayes’ theorem and na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁcation. In this chap- ter, we describe Bayesian belief networks—probabilistic graphical models, which unlike naïve Bayesian classiﬁers allow the representation of dependencies among subsets of attributes. Bayesian belief networks can be used for classiﬁcation. Section 9.1.1 intro- duces the basic concepts of Bayesian belief networks. In Section 9.1.2, you will learn how to train such models. c⃝2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques 393 394 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods 9.1.1 Concepts and Mechanisms The na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁer makes the assumption of class conditional independence, that is, given the class label of a tuple, the values of the attributes are assumed to be conditionally independent of one another. This simpliﬁes computation. When the assumption holds true, then the naïve Bayesian classiﬁer is the most accurate in com- parison with all other classiﬁers. In practice, however, dependencies can exist between variables. Bayesian belief networks specify joint conditional probability distributions. They allow class conditional independencies to be deﬁned between subsets of variables. They provide a graphical model of causal relationships, on which learning can be per- formed. Trained Bayesian belief networks can be used for classiﬁcation. Bayesian belief networks are also known as belief networks, Bayesian networks, and probabilistic networks. For brevity, we will refer to them as belief networks. A belief network is deﬁned by two components—a directed acyclic graph and a set of conditional probability tables (Figure 9.1). Each node in the directed acyclic graph rep- resents a random variable. The variables may be discrete- or continuous-valued. They may correspond to actual attributes given in the data or to “hidden variables” believed to form a relationship (e.g., in the case of medical data, a hidden variable may indicate a syndrome, representing a number of symptoms that, together, characterize a speciﬁc disease). Each arc represents a probabilistic dependence. If an arc is drawn from a node Y to a node Z, then Y is a parent or immediate predecessor of Z, and Z is a descendant FamilyHistory LungCancer PositiveXRay Smoker Emphysema Dyspnea (a) (b) FH, S 0.8 0.2 LC ~LC FH, ~S 0.5 0.5 ~FH, S 0.7 0.3 ~FH, ~S 0.1 0.9 Figure 9.1 Simple Bayesian belief network. (a) A proposed causal model, represented by a directed acyclic graph. (b) The conditional probability table for the values of the variable LungCancer (LC) showing each possible combination of the values of its parent nodes, FamilyHis- tory (FH) and Smoker (S). Source: Adapted from Russell, Binder, Koller, and Kanazawa [RBKK95]. 9.1 Bayesian Belief Networks 395 of Y. Each variable is conditionally independent of its nondescendants in the graph, given its parents. Figure 9.1 is a simple belief network, adapted from Russell, Binder, Koller, and Kanazawa [RBKK95] for six Boolean variables. The arcs in Figure 9.1(a) allow a rep- resentation of causal knowledge. For example, having lung cancer is inﬂuenced by a person’s family history of lung cancer, as well as whether or not the person is a smoker. Note that the variable PositiveXRay is independent of whether the patient has a family history of lung cancer or is a smoker, given that we know the patient has lung cancer. In other words, once we know the outcome of the variable LungCancer, then the variables FamilyHistory and Smoker do not provide any additional information regarding Posi- tiveXRay. The arcs also show that the variable LungCancer is conditionally independent of Emphysema, given its parents, FamilyHistory and Smoker. A belief network has one conditional probability table (CPT) for each variable. The CPT for a variable Y speciﬁes the conditional distribution P(Y|Parents(Y)), where Parents(Y) are the parents of Y. Figure 9.1(b) shows a CPT for the variable LungCancer. The conditional probability for each known value of LungCancer is given for each pos- sible combination of the values of its parents. For instance, from the upper leftmost and bottom rightmost entries, respectively, we see that P(LungCancer = yes|FamilyHistory = yes, Smoker = yes) = 0.8 P(LungCancer = no|FamilyHistory = no, Smoker = no) = 0.9. Let X = (x1,..., xn) be a data tuple described by the variables or attributes Y1,..., Yn, respectively. Recall that each variable is conditionally independent of its nondescen- dants in the network graph, given its parents. This allows the network to provide a complete representation of the existing joint probability distribution with the following equation: P(x1,..., xn) = n Y i=1 P(xi|Parents(Yi)), (9.1) where P(x1,..., xn) is the probability of a particular combination of values of X, and the values for P(xi|Parents(Yi)) correspond to the entries in the CPT for Yi. A node within the network can be selected as an “output” node, representing a class label attribute. There may be more than one output node. Various algorithms for infer- ence and learning can be applied to the network. Rather than returning a single class label, the classiﬁcation process can return a probability distribution that gives the prob- ability of each class. Belief networks can be used to answer probability of evidence queries (e.g., what is the probability that an individual will have LungCancer, given that they have both PositiveXRay and Dyspnea) and most probable explanation queries (e.g., which group of the population is most likely to have both PositiveXRay and Dyspnea). Belief networks have been used to model a number of well-known problems. One example is genetic linkage analysis (e.g., the mapping of genes onto a chromosome). By casting the gene linkage problem in terms of inference on Bayesian networks, and using 396 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods state-of-the art algorithms, the scalability of such analysis has advanced considerably. Other applications that have beneﬁted from the use of belief networks include computer vision (e.g., image restoration and stereo vision), document and text analysis, decision- support systems, and sensitivity analysis. The ease with which many applications can be reduced to Bayesian network inference is advantageous in that it curbs the need to invent specialized algorithms for each such application. 9.1.2 Training Bayesian Belief Networks “How does a Bayesian belief network learn?” In the learning or training of a belief net- work, a number of scenarios are possible. The network topology (or “layout” of nodes and arcs) may be constructed by human experts or inferred from the data. The network variables may be observable or hidden in all or some of the training tuples. The hidden data case is also referred to as missing values or incomplete data. Several algorithms exist for learning the network topology from the training data given observable variables. The problem is one of discrete optimization. For solutions, please see the bibliographic notes at the end of this chapter (Section 9.10). Human experts usually have a good grasp of the direct conditional dependencies that hold in the domain under analysis, which helps in network design. Experts must specify conditional probabilities for the nodes that participate in direct dependencies. These probabilities can then be used to compute the remaining probability values. If the network topology is known and the variables are observable, then training the network is straightforward. It consists of computing the CPT entries, as is similarly done when computing the probabilities involved in na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁcation. When the network topology is given and some of the variables are hidden, there are various methods to choose from for training the belief network. We will describe a promising method of gradient descent. For those without an advanced math back- ground, the description may look rather intimidating with its calculus-packed formulae. However, packaged software exists to solve these equations, and the general idea is easy to follow. Let D be a training set of data tuples, X1,X2,..., X|D|. Training the belief network means that we must learn the values of the CPT entries. Let wijk be a CPT entry for the variable Yi = yij having the parents Ui = uik, where wijk ≡P(Yi = yij|Ui = uik). For example, if wijk is the upper leftmost CPT entry of Figure 9.1(b), then Yi is LungCancer; yij is its value, “yes”; Ui lists the parent nodes of Yi, namely, {FamilyHistory, Smoker}; and uik lists the values of the parent nodes, namely, {“yes”, “yes”}. The wijk are viewed as weights, analogous to the weights in hidden units of neural networks (Section 9.2). The set of weights is collectively referred to as W. The weights are initialized to ran- dom probability values. A gradient descent strategy performs greedy hill-climbing. At each iteration, the weights are updated and will eventually converge to a local optimum solution. A gradient descent strategy is used to search for the wijk values that best model the data, based on the assumption that each possible setting of wijk is equally likely. Such 9.1 Bayesian Belief Networks 397 a strategy is iterative. It searches for a solution along the negative of the gradient (i.e., steepest descent) of a criterion function. We want to ﬁnd the set of weights, W, that maximize this function. To start with, the weights are initialized to random probabil- ity values. The gradient descent method performs greedy hill-climbing in that, at each iteration or step along the way, the algorithm moves toward what appears to be the best solution at the moment, without backtracking. The weights are updated at each iteration. Eventually, they converge to a local optimum solution. For our problem, we maximize Pw(D) = Q|D| d=1 Pw(Xd). This can be done by fol- lowing the gradient of lnPw(S), which makes the problem simpler. Given the network topology and initialized wijk, the algorithm proceeds as follows: 1. Compute the gradients: For each i, j, k, compute ∂lnPw(D) ∂wijk = |D| X d=1 P(Yi = yij, Ui = uik|Xd) wijk . (9.2) The probability on the right side of Eq. (9.2) is to be calculated for each training tuple, Xd, in D. For brevity, let’s refer to this probability simply as p. When the variables represented by Yi and Ui are hidden for some Xd, then the corresponding proba- bility p can be computed from the observed variables of the tuple using standard algorithms for Bayesian network inference such as those available in the commercial software package HUGIN (www.hugin.dk). 2. Take a small step in the direction of the gradient: The weights are updated by wijk ←wijk + (l)∂lnPw(D) ∂wijk , (9.3) where l is the learning rate representing the step size and ∂lnPw(D) ∂wijk is computed from Eq. (9.2). The learning rate is set to a small constant and helps with convergence. 3. Renormalize the weights: Because the weights wijk are probability values, they must be between 0.0 and 1.0, and P j wijk must equal 1 for all i, k. These criteria are achieved by renormalizing the weights after they have been updated by Eq. (9.3). Algorithms that follow this learning form are called adaptive probabilistic networks. Other methods for training belief networks are referenced in the bibliographic notes at the end of this chapter (Section 9.10). Belief networks are computationally inten- sive. Because belief networks provide explicit representations of causal structure, a human expert can provide prior knowledge to the training process in the form of net- work topology and/or conditional probability values. This can signiﬁcantly improve the learning rate. 398 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods 9.2 Classiﬁcation by Backpropagation “What is backpropagation?” Backpropagation is a neural network learning algorithm. The neural networks ﬁeld was originally kindled by psychologists and neurobiologists who sought to develop and test computational analogs of neurons. Roughly speaking, a neural network is a set of connected input/output units in which each connection has a weight associated with it. During the learning phase, the network learns by adjusting the weights so as to be able to predict the correct class label of the input tuples. Neural network learning is also referred to as connectionist learning due to the connections between units. Neural networks involve long training times and are therefore more suitable for appli- cations where this is feasible. They require a number of parameters that are typically best determined empirically such as the network topology or “structure.” Neural net- works have been criticized for their poor interpretability. For example, it is difﬁcult for humans to interpret the symbolic meaning behind the learned weights and of “hidden units” in the network. These features initially made neural networks less desirable for data mining. Advantages of neural networks, however, include their high tolerance of noisy data as well as their ability to classify patterns on which they have not been trained. They can be used when you may have little knowledge of the relationships between attributes and classes. They are well suited for continuous-valued inputs and outputs, unlike most decision tree algorithms. They have been successful on a wide array of real-world data, including handwritten character recognition, pathology and laboratory medicine, and training a computer to pronounce English text. Neural network algorithms are inher- ently parallel; parallelization techniques can be used to speed up the computation process. In addition, several techniques have been recently developed for rule extrac- tion from trained neural networks. These factors contribute to the usefulness of neural networks for classiﬁcation and numeric prediction in data mining. There are many different kinds of neural networks and neural network algorithms. The most popular neural network algorithm is backpropagation, which gained repute in the 1980s. In Section 9.2.1 you will learn about multilayer feed-forward net- works, the type of neural network on which the backpropagation algorithm performs. Section 9.2.2 discusses deﬁning a network topology. The backpropagation algorithm is described in Section 9.2.3. Rule extraction from trained neural networks is discussed in Section 9.2.4. 9.2.1 A Multilayer Feed-Forward Neural Network The backpropagation algorithm performs learning on a multilayer feed-forward neural network. It iteratively learns a set of weights for prediction of the class label of tuples. A multilayer feed-forward neural network consists of an input layer, one or more hidden layers, and an output layer. An example of a multilayer feed-forward network is shown in Figure 9.2. 9.2 Classiﬁcation by Backpropagation 399 1 1j 2j 2 Figure 9.2 Multilayer feed-forward neural network. Each layer is made up of units. The inputs to the network correspond to the attributes measured for each training tuple. The inputs are fed simultaneously into the units making up the input layer. These inputs pass through the input layer and are then weighted and fed simultaneously to a second layer of “neuronlike” units, known as a hidden layer. The outputs of the hidden layer units can be input to another hidden layer, and so on. The number of hidden layers is arbitrary, although in practice, usually only one is used. The weighted outputs of the last hidden layer are input to units making up the output layer, which emits the network’s prediction for given tuples. The units in the input layer are called input units. The units in the hidden layers and output layer are sometimes referred to as neurodes, due to their symbolic biological basis, or as output units. The multilayer neural network shown in Figure 9.2 has two layers of output units. Therefore, we say that it is a two-layer neural network. (The input layer is not counted because it serves only to pass the input values to the next layer.) Similarly, a network containing two hidden layers is called a three-layer neural network, and so on. It is a feed-forward network since none of the weights cycles back to an input unit or to a previous layer’s output unit. It is fully connected in that each unit provides input to each unit in the next forward layer. Each output unit takes, as input, a weighted sum of the outputs from units in the previous layer (see Figure 9.4 later). It applies a nonlinear (activation) function to the weighted input. Multilayer feed-forward neural networks are able to model the class pre- diction as a nonlinear combination of the inputs. From a statistical point of view, they perform nonlinear regression. Multilayer feed-forward networks, given enough hidden units and enough training samples, can closely approximate any function. 400 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods 9.2.2 Deﬁning a Network Topology “How can I design the neural network’s topology?” Before training can begin, the user must decide on the network topology by specifying the number of units in the input layer, the number of hidden layers (if more than one), the number of units in each hidden layer, and the number of units in the output layer. Normalizing the input values for each attribute measured in the training tuples will help speed up the learning phase. Typically, input values are normalized so as to fall between 0.0 and 1.0. Discrete-valued attributes may be encoded such that there is one input unit per domain value. For example, if an attribute A has three possible or known values, namely {a0, a1, a2}, then we may assign three input units to represent A. That is, we may have, say, I0, I1, I2 as input units. Each unit is initialized to 0. If A = a0, then I0 is set to 1 and the rest are 0. If A = a1, then I1 is set to 1 and the rest are 0, and so on. Neural networks can be used for both classiﬁcation (to predict the class label of a given tuple) and numeric prediction (to predict a continuous-valued output). For clas- siﬁcation, one output unit may be used to represent two classes (where the value 1 represents one class, and the value 0 represents the other). If there are more than two classes, then one output unit per class is used. (See Section 9.7.1 for more strategies on multiclass classiﬁcation.) There are no clear rules as to the “best” number of hidden layer units. Network design is a trial-and-error process and may affect the accuracy of the resulting trained net- work. The initial values of the weights may also affect the resulting accuracy. Once a network has been trained and its accuracy is not considered acceptable, it is common to repeat the training process with a different network topology or a different set of initial weights. Cross-validation techniques for accuracy estimation (described in Chapter 8) can be used to help decide when an acceptable network has been found. A number of automated techniques have been proposed that search for a “good” network structure. These typically use a hill-climbing approach that starts with an initial structure that is selectively modiﬁed. 9.2.3 Backpropagation “How does backpropagation work?” Backpropagation learns by iteratively processing a data set of training tuples, comparing the network’s prediction for each tuple with the actual known target value. The target value may be the known class label of the training tuple (for classiﬁcation problems) or a continuous value (for numeric prediction). For each training tuple, the weights are modiﬁed so as to minimize the mean-squared error between the network’s prediction and the actual target value. These modiﬁcations are made in the “backwards” direction (i.e., from the output layer) through each hidden layer down to the ﬁrst hidden layer (hence the name backpropagation). Although it is not guaranteed, in general the weights will eventually converge, and the learning process stops. The algorithm is summarized in Figure 9.3. The steps involved are expressed in terms of inputs, outputs, and errors, and may seem awkward if this is your ﬁrst look at 9.2 Classiﬁcation by Backpropagation 401 Algorithm: Backpropagation. Neural network learning for classiﬁcation or numeric prediction, using the backpropagation algorithm. Input: D, a data set consisting of the training tuples and their associated target values; l, the learning rate; network, a multilayer feed-forward network. Output: A trained neural network. Method: (1) Initialize all weights and biases in network; (2) while terminating condition is not satisﬁed { (3) for each training tuple X in D { (4) // Propagate the inputs forward: (5) for each input layer unit j { (6) Oj = Ij; // output of an input unit is its actual input value (7) for each hidden or output layer unit j { (8) Ij = P i wijOi + θj; //compute the net input of unit j with respect to the previous layer, i (9) Oj = 1 1+e−Ij ; } // compute the output of each unit j (10) // Backpropagate the errors: (11) for each unit j in the output layer (12) Errj = Oj(1 −Oj)(Tj −Oj); // compute the error (13) for each unit j in the hidden layers, from the last to the ﬁrst hidden layer (14) Errj = Oj(1 −Oj)P k Errkwjk; // compute the error with respect to the next higher layer, k (15) for each weight wij in network { (16) 1wij = (l)ErrjOi; // weight increment (17) wij = wij + 1wij; } // weight update (18) for each bias θj in network { (19) 1θj = (l)Errj; // bias increment (20) θj = θj + 1θj; } // bias update (21) } } Figure 9.3 Backpropagation algorithm. neural network learning. However, once you become familiar with the process, you will see that each step is inherently simple. The steps are described next. Initialize the weights: The weights in the network are initialized to small random num- bers (e.g., ranging from −1.0 to 1.0, or −0.5 to 0.5). Each unit has a bias associated with it, as explained later. The biases are similarly initialized to small random numbers. Each training tuple, X, is processed by the following steps. Propagate the inputs forward: First, the training tuple is fed to the network’s input layer. The inputs pass through the input units, unchanged. That is, for an input unit, j, 402 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods y1 y2 yn Weights w1j w2j wnj Output Bias f Inputs (outputs from previous layer) Weighted sum Activation function . . . Σ j Figure 9.4 Hidden or output layer unit j: The inputs to unit j are outputs from the previous layer. These are multiplied by their corresponding weights to form a weighted sum, which is added to the bias associated with unit j. A nonlinear activation function is applied to the net input. (For ease of explanation, the inputs to unit j are labeled y1, y2,..., yn. If unit j were in the ﬁrst hidden layer, then these inputs would correspond to the input tuple (x1, x2,..., xn).) its output, Oj, is equal to its input value, Ij. Next, the net input and output of each unit in the hidden and output layers are computed. The net input to a unit in the hidden or output layers is computed as a linear combination of its inputs. To help illustrate this point, a hidden layer or output layer unit is shown in Figure 9.4. Each such unit has a number of inputs to it that are, in fact, the outputs of the units connected to it in the previous layer. Each connection has a weight. To compute the net input to the unit, each input connected to the unit is multiplied by its corresponding weight, and this is summed. Given a unit, j in a hidden or output layer, the net input, Ij, to unit j is Ij = X i wijOi + θj, (9.4) where wij is the weight of the connection from unit i in the previous layer to unit j; Oi is the output of unit i from the previous layer; and θj is the bias of the unit. The bias acts as a threshold in that it serves to vary the activity of the unit. Each unit in the hidden and output layers takes its net input and then applies an acti- vation function to it, as illustrated in Figure 9.4. The function symbolizes the activation of the neuron represented by the unit. The logistic, or sigmoid, function is used. Given the net input Ij to unit j, then Oj, the output of unit j, is computed as Oj = 1 1 + e−Ij . (9.5) 9.2 Classiﬁcation by Backpropagation 403 This function is also referred to as a squashing function, because it maps a large input domain onto the smaller range of 0 to 1. The logistic function is nonlinear and differentiable, allowing the backpropagation algorithm to model classiﬁcation problems that are linearly inseparable. We compute the output values, Oj, for each hidden layer, up to and including the output layer, which gives the network’s prediction. In practice, it is a good idea to cache (i.e., save) the intermediate output values at each unit as they are required again later when backpropagating the error. This trick can substantially reduce the amount of computation required. Backpropagate the error: The error is propagated backward by updating the weights and biases to reﬂect the error of the network’s prediction. For a unit j in the output layer, the error Errj is computed by Errj = Oj(1 −Oj)(Tj −Oj), (9.6) where Oj is the actual output of unit j, and Tj is the known target value of the given training tuple. Note that Oj(1 −Oj) is the derivative of the logistic function. To compute the error of a hidden layer unit j, the weighted sum of the errors of the units connected to unit j in the next layer are considered. The error of a hidden layer unit j is Errj = Oj(1 −Oj) X k Errkwjk, (9.7) where wjk is the weight of the connection from unit j to a unit k in the next higher layer, and Errk is the error of unit k. The weights and biases are updated to reﬂect the propagated errors. Weights are updated by the following equations, where 1wij is the change in weight wij: 1wij = (l )ErrjOi. (9.8) wij = wij + 1wij. (9.9) “What is l in Eq. (9.8)?” The variable l is the learning rate, a constant typically having a value between 0.0 and 1.0. Backpropagation learns using a gradient descent method to search for a set of weights that ﬁts the training data so as to minimize the mean- squared distance between the network’s class prediction and the known target value of the tuples.1 The learning rate helps avoid getting stuck at a local minimum in decision space (i.e., where the weights appear to converge, but are not the optimum solution) and encourages ﬁnding the global minimum. If the learning rate is too small, then learning will occur at a very slow pace. If the learning rate is too large, then oscillation between 1A method of gradient descent was also used for training Bayesian belief networks, as described in Section 9.1.2. 404 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods inadequate solutions may occur. A rule of thumb is to set the learning rate to 1/t, where t is the number of iterations through the training set so far. Biases are updated by the following equations, where 1θj is the change in bias θj: 1θj = (l)Errj. (9.10) θj = θj + 1θj. (9.11) Note that here we are updating the weights and biases after the presentation of each tuple. This is referred to as case updating. Alternatively, the weight and bias incre- ments could be accumulated in variables, so that the weights and biases are updated after all the tuples in the training set have been presented. This latter strategy is called epoch updating, where one iteration through the training set is an epoch. In the- ory, the mathematical derivation of backpropagation employs epoch updating, yet in practice, case updating is more common because it tends to yield more accurate results. Terminating condition: Training stops when All 1wij in the previous epoch are so small as to be below some speciﬁed threshold, or The percentage of tuples misclassiﬁed in the previous epoch is below some thresh- old, or A prespeciﬁed number of epochs has expired. In practice, several hundreds of thousands of epochs may be required before the weights will converge. “How efﬁcient is backpropagation?” The computational efﬁciency depends on the time spent training the network. Given |D| tuples and w weights, each epoch requires O(|D| × w) time. However, in the worst-case scenario, the number of epochs can be exponential in n, the number of inputs. In practice, the time required for the networks to converge is highly variable. A number of techniques exist that help speed up the train- ing time. For example, a technique known as simulated annealing can be used, which also ensures convergence to a global optimum. Example 9.1 Sample calculations for learning by the backpropagation algorithm. Figure 9.5 shows a multilayer feed-forward neural network. Let the learning rate be 0.9. The initial weight and bias values of the network are given in Table 9.1, along with the ﬁrst training tuple, X = (1, 0, 1), with a class label of 1. This example shows the calculations for backpropagation, given the ﬁrst training tuple, X. The tuple is fed into the network, and the net input and output of each unit 9.2 Classiﬁcation by Backpropagation 405 are computed. These values are shown in Table 9.2. The error of each unit is computed and propagated backward. The error values are shown in Table 9.3. The weight and bias updates are shown in Table 9.4. 5 4 6 w46 w56 w35 w34 w25 w24 w15 w14 x1 x2 x3 1 2 3 Figure 9.5 Example of a multilayer feed-forward neural network. Table 9.1 Initial Input, Weight, and Bias Values x1 x2 x3 w14 w15 w24 w25 w34 w35 w46 w56 θ4 θ5 θ6 1 0 1 0.2 −0.3 0.4 0.1 −0.5 0.2 −0.3 −0.2 −0.4 0.2 0.1 Table 9.2 Net Input and Output Calculations Unit, j Net Input, Ij Output, Oj 4 0.2 + 0 −0.5 −0.4 = −0.7 1/(1 + e0.7) = 0.332 5 −0.3 + 0 + 0.2 + 0.2 = 0.1 1/(1 + e−0.1) = 0.525 6 (−0.3)(0.332) −(0.2)(0.525) + 0.1 = −0.105 1/(1 + e0.105) = 0.474 Table 9.3 Calculation of the Error at Each Node Unit, j Errj 6 (0.474)(1 −0.474)(1 −0.474) = 0.1311 5 (0.525)(1 −0.525)(0.1311)(−0.2) = −0.0065 4 (0.332)(1 −0.332)(0.1311)(−0.3) = −0.0087 406 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods Table 9.4 Calculations for Weight and Bias Updating Weight or Bias New Value w46 −0.3 + (0.9)(0.1311)(0.332) = −0.261 w56 −0.2 + (0.9)(0.1311)(0.525) = −0.138 w14 0.2 + (0.9)(−0.0087)(1) = 0.192 w15 −0.3 + (0.9)(−0.0065)(1) = −0.306 w24 0.4 + (0.9)(−0.0087)(0) = 0.4 w25 0.1 + (0.9)(−0.0065)(0) = 0.1 w34 −0.5 + (0.9)(−0.0087)(1) = −0.508 w35 0.2 + (0.9)(−0.0065)(1) = 0.194 θ6 0.1 + (0.9)(0.1311) = 0.218 θ5 0.2 + (0.9)(−0.0065) = 0.194 θ4 −0.4 + (0.9)(−0.0087) = −0.408 “How can we classify an unknown tuple using a trained network?” To classify an unknown tuple, X, the tuple is input to the trained network, and the net input and output of each unit are computed. (There is no need for computation and/or backpro- pagation of the error.) If there is one output node per class, then the output node with the highest value determines the predicted class label for X. If there is only one output node, then output values greater than or equal to 0.5 may be considered as belonging to the positive class, while values less than 0.5 may be considered negative. Several variations and alternatives to the backpropagation algorithm have been pro- posed for classiﬁcation in neural networks. These may involve the dynamic adjustment of the network topology and of the learning rate or other parameters, or the use of different error functions. 9.2.4 Inside the Black Box: Backpropagation and Interpretability “Neural networks are like a black box. How can I ‘understand’ what the backpropagation network has learned?” A major disadvantage of neural networks lies in their knowledge representation. Acquired knowledge in the form of a network of units connected by weighted links is difﬁcult for humans to interpret. This factor has motivated research in extracting the knowledge embedded in trained neural networks and in representing that knowledge symbolically. Methods include extracting rules from networks and sensitivity analysis. Various algorithms for rule extraction have been proposed. The methods typically impose restrictions regarding procedures used in training the given neural network, the network topology, and the discretization of input values. Fully connected networks are difﬁcult to articulate. Hence, often the ﬁrst step in extracting rules from neural networks is network pruning. This consists of simplifying 9.2 Classiﬁcation by Backpropagation 407 the network structure by removing weighted links that have the least effect on the trained network. For example, a weighted link may be deleted if such removal does not result in a decrease in the classiﬁcation accuracy of the network. Once the trained network has been pruned, some approaches will then perform link, unit, or activation value clustering. In one method, for example, clustering is used to ﬁnd the set of common activation values for each hidden unit in a given trained two- layer neural network (Figure 9.6). The combinations of these activation values for each hidden unit are analyzed. Rules are derived relating combinations of activation values H1 H2 H3 O1 O2 I1 I2 I3 I4 I5 I6 I7 Identify sets of common activation values for each hidden node, Hi: Derive rules relating common activation values with output nodes, Oj: Derive rules relating input nodes, Ij, to output nodes, Oj: Obtain rules relating inputs and output classes: for H1: (–1,0,1) for H2: (0,1) for H3: (–1,0.24,1) IF (H2=0 AND H3=–1) OR (H1=–1 AND H2= 1 AND H3= –1) OR (H1=–1 AND H2= 0 AND H3= 0.24) THEN O1=1, O2=0 ELSE O1=0, O2= 1 IF (I2=0 AND I7=0) THEN H2= 0 IF (I4=1 AND I6=1) THEN H3= –1 IF (I5=0) THEN H3=–1 IF (I2=0 AND I7=0 AND I4= 1 AND I6=1) THEN class =1 IF (I2=0 AND I7=0 AND I5= 0) THEN class=1 Figure 9.6 Rules can be extracted from training neural networks. Source: Adapted from Lu, Setiono, and Liu [LSL95]. 408 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods with corresponding output unit values. Similarly, the sets of input values and activation values are studied to derive rules describing the relationship between the input layer and the hidden “layer units”? Finally, the two sets of rules may be combined to form IF-THEN rules. Other algorithms may derive rules of other forms, including M-of-N rules (where M out of a given N conditions in the rule antecedent must be true for the rule consequent to be applied), decision trees with M-of-N tests, fuzzy rules, and ﬁnite automata. Sensitivity analysis is used to assess the impact that a given input variable has on a network output. The input to the variable is varied while the remaining input variables are ﬁxed at some value. Meanwhile, changes in the network output are monitored. The knowledge gained from this analysis form can be represented in rules such as “IF X decreases 5% THEN Y increases 8%.” 9.3 Support Vector Machines In this section, we study support vector machines (SVMs), a method for the classiﬁ- cation of both linear and nonlinear data. In a nutshell, an SVM is an algorithm that works as follows. It uses a nonlinear mapping to transform the original training data into a higher dimension. Within this new dimension, it searches for the linear opti- mal separating hyperplane (i.e., a “decision boundary” separating the tuples of one class from another). With an appropriate nonlinear mapping to a sufﬁciently high dimen- sion, data from two classes can always be separated by a hyperplane. The SVM ﬁnds this hyperplane using support vectors (“essential” training tuples) and margins (deﬁned by the support vectors). We will delve more into these new concepts later. “I’ve heard that SVMs have attracted a great deal of attention lately. Why?” The ﬁrst paper on support vector machines was presented in 1992 by Vladimir Vapnik and col- leagues Bernhard Boser and Isabelle Guyon, although the groundwork for SVMs has been around since the 1960s (including early work by Vapnik and Alexei Chervonenkis on statistical learning theory). Although the training time of even the fastest SVMs can be extremely slow, they are highly accurate, owing to their ability to model com- plex nonlinear decision boundaries. They are much less prone to overﬁtting than other methods. The support vectors found also provide a compact description of the learned model. SVMs can be used for numeric prediction as well as classiﬁcation. They have been applied to a number of areas, including handwritten digit recognition, object recognition, and speaker identiﬁcation, as well as benchmark time-series prediction tests. 9.3.1 The Case When the Data Are Linearly Separable To explain the mystery of SVMs, let’s ﬁrst look at the simplest case—a two-class prob- lem where the classes are linearly separable. Let the data set D be given as (X1, y1), (X2, y2), ... , (X|D|, y|D|), where Xi is the set of training tuples with associated class labels, yi. Each yi can take one of two values, either +1 or −1 (i.e., yi ∈{+1, −1}), 9.3 Support Vector Machines 409 A2 A1 Class 1, y = +1 (buys_computer= yes) Class 2, y = −1 (buys_computer =no) Figure 9.7 The 2-D training data are linearly separable. There are an inﬁnite number of possible separating hyperplanes or “decision boundaries,” some of which are shown here as dashed lines. Which one is best? corresponding to the classes buys computer = yes and buys computer = no, respectively. To aid in visualization, let’s consider an example based on two input attributes, A1 and A2, as shown in Figure 9.7. From the graph, we see that the 2-D data are linearly separa- ble (or “linear,” for short), because a straight line can be drawn to separate all the tuples of class +1 from all the tuples of class −1. There are an inﬁnite number of separating lines that could be drawn. We want to ﬁnd the “best” one, that is, one that (we hope) will have the minimum classiﬁcation error on previously unseen tuples. How can we ﬁnd this best line? Note that if our data were 3-D (i.e., with three attributes), we would want to ﬁnd the best separating plane. Generalizing to n dimensions, we want to ﬁnd the best hyperplane. We will use “hyperplane” to refer to the decision boundary that we are seeking, regardless of the number of input attributes. So, in other words, how can we ﬁnd the best hyperplane? An SVM approaches this problem by searching for the maximum marginal hyper- plane. Consider Figure 9.8, which shows two possible separating hyperplanes and their associated margins. Before we get into the deﬁnition of margins, let’s take an intuitive look at this ﬁgure. Both hyperplanes can correctly classify all the given data tuples. Intu- itively, however, we expect the hyperplane with the larger margin to be more accurate at classifying future data tuples than the hyperplane with the smaller margin. This is why (during the learning or training phase) the SVM searches for the hyperplane with the largest margin, that is, the maximum marginal hyperplane (MMH). The associated margin gives the largest separation between classes. 410 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods Class 1, y= +1 (buys_computer = yes) Class 2, y= −1 (buys_computer = no) Class 1, y=+1 (buys_computer = yes) Class 2, y = −1 (buys_computer = no) A1 A2 Large margin A1 A2 Small margin (a) (b) Figure 9.8 Here we see just two possible separating hyperplanes and their associated margins. Which one is better? The one with the larger margin (b) should have greater generalization accuracy. Getting to an informal deﬁnition of margin, we can say that the shortest distance from a hyperplane to one side of its margin is equal to the shortest distance from the hyperplane to the other side of its margin, where the “sides” of the margin are parallel to the hyperplane. When dealing with the MMH, this distance is, in fact, the shortest distance from the MMH to the closest training tuple of either class. A separating hyperplane can be written as W · X + b = 0, (9.12) where W is a weight vector, namely, W = {w1, w2,..., wn}; n is the number of attributes; and b is a scalar, often referred to as a bias. To aid in visualization, let’s consider two input attributes, A1 and A2, as in Figure 9.8(b). Training tuples are 2-D (e.g., X = (x1, x2)), where x1 and x2 are the values of attributes A1 and A2, respectively, for X. If we think of b as an additional weight, w0, we can rewrite Eq. (9.12) as w0 + w1x1 + w2x2 = 0. (9.13) Thus, any point that lies above the separating hyperplane satisﬁes w0 + w1x1 + w2x2 > 0. (9.14) Similarly, any point that lies below the separating hyperplane satisﬁes w0 + w1x1 + w2x2 < 0. (9.15) 9.3 Support Vector Machines 411 The weights can be adjusted so that the hyperplanes deﬁning the “sides” of the margin can be written as H1 : w0 + w1x1 + w2x2 ≥1 for yi = +1, (9.16) H2 : w0 + w1x1 + w2x2 ≤−1 for yi = −1. (9.17) That is, any tuple that falls on or above H1 belongs to class +1, and any tuple that falls on or below H2 belongs to class −1. Combining the two inequalities of Eqs. (9.16) and (9.17), we get yi(w0 + w1x1 + w2x2) ≥1, ∀i. (9.18) Any training tuples that fall on hyperplanes H1 or H2 (i.e., the “sides” deﬁning the margin) satisfy Eq. (9.18) and are called support vectors. That is, they are equally close to the (separating) MMH. In Figure 9.9, the support vectors are shown encircled with a thicker border. Essentially, the support vectors are the most difﬁcult tuples to classify and give the most information regarding classiﬁcation. From this, we can obtain a formula for the size of the maximal margin. The distance from the separating hyperplane to any point on H1 is 1 ||W||, where ||W|| is the Euclidean norm of W, that is, √ W · W.2 By deﬁnition, this is equal to the distance from any point on H2 to the separating hyperplane. Therefore, the maximal margin is 2 ||W||. Class 1, y = +1 (buys_computer = yes) Class 2, y= −1 (buys_computer = no) A1 A2 Large margin Figure 9.9 Support vectors. The SVM ﬁnds the maximum separating hyperplane, that is, the one with maximum distance between the nearest training tuples. The support vectors are shown with a thicker border. 2If W = {w1, w2,..., wn}, then √ W · W = q w2 1 + w2 2 + ··· + w2n. 412 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods “So, how does an SVM ﬁnd the MMH and the support vectors?” Using some “fancy math tricks,” we can rewrite Eq. (9.18) so that it becomes what is known as a constrained (convex) quadratic optimization problem. Such fancy math tricks are beyond the scope of this book. Advanced readers may be interested to note that the tricks involve rewrit- ing Eq. (9.18) using a Lagrangian formulation and then solving for the solution using Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions. Details can be found in the bibliographic notes at the end of this chapter (Section 9.10). If the data are small (say, less than 2000 training tuples), any optimization software package for solving constrained convex quadratic problems can then be used to ﬁnd the support vectors and MMH. For larger data, special and more efﬁcient algorithms for training SVMs can be used instead, the details of which exceed the scope of this book. Once we’ve found the support vectors and MMH (note that the support vectors deﬁne the MMH!), we have a trained support vector machine. The MMH is a linear class boundary, and so the corresponding SVM can be used to classify linearly separable data. We refer to such a trained SVM as a linear SVM. “Once I’ve got a trained support vector machine, how do I use it to classify test (i.e., new) tuples?” Based on the Lagrangian formulation mentioned before, the MMH can be rewritten as the decision boundary d(XT) = lX i=1 yiαiXiXT + b0, (9.19) where yi is the class label of support vector Xi; XT is a test tuple; αi and b0 are numeric parameters that were determined automatically by the optimization or SVM algorithm noted before; and l is the number of support vectors. Interested readers may note that the αi are Lagrangian multipliers. For linearly sepa- rable data, the support vectors are a subset of the actual training tuples (although there will be a slight twist regarding this when dealing with nonlinearly separable data, as we shall see in the following). Given a test tuple, XT, we plug it into Eq. (9.19), and then check to see the sign of the result. This tells us on which side of the hyperplane the test tuple falls. If the sign is posi- tive, then XT falls on or above the MMH, and so the SVM predicts that XT belongs to class +1 (representing buys computer = yes, in our case). If the sign is negative, then XT falls on or below the MMH and the class prediction is −1 (representing buys computer = no). Notice that the Lagrangian formulation of our problem (Eq. 9.19) contains a dot product between support vector Xi and test tuple XT. This will prove very useful for ﬁnding the MMH and support vectors for the case when the given data are nonlinearly separable, as described further in the next section. Before we move on to the nonlinear case, there are two more important things to note. The complexity of the learned classiﬁer is characterized by the number of support vectors rather than the dimensionality of the data. Hence, SVMs tend to be less prone to overﬁtting than some other methods. The support vectors are the essential or critical training tuples—they lie closest to the decision boundary (MMH). If all other training 9.3 Support Vector Machines 413 tuples were removed and training were repeated, the same separating hyperplane would be found. Furthermore, the number of support vectors found can be used to compute an (upper) bound on the expected error rate of the SVM classiﬁer, which is independent of the data dimensionality. An SVM with a small number of support vectors can have good generalization, even when the dimensionality of the data is high. 9.3.2 The Case When the Data Are Linearly Inseparable In Section 9.3.1 we learned about linear SVMs for classifying linearly separable data, but what if the data are not linearly separable, as in Figure 9.10? In such cases, no straight line can be found that would separate the classes. The linear SVMs we studied would not be able to ﬁnd a feasible solution here. Now what? The good news is that the approach described for linear SVMs can be extended to create nonlinear SVMs for the classiﬁcation of linearly inseparable data (also called non- linearly separable data, or nonlinear data for short). Such SVMs are capable of ﬁnding nonlinear decision boundaries (i.e., nonlinear hypersurfaces) in input space. “So,” you may ask, “how can we extend the linear approach?” We obtain a nonlinear SVM by extending the approach for linear SVMs as follows. There are two main steps. In the ﬁrst step, we transform the original input data into a higher dimensional space using a nonlinear mapping. Several common nonlinear mappings can be used in this step, as we will further describe next. Once the data have been transformed into the new higher space, the second step searches for a linear separating hyperplane in the new space. We again end up with a quadratic optimization problem that can be solved using the linear SVM formulation. The maximal marginal hyperplane found in the new space corresponds to a nonlinear separating hypersurface in the original space. A1 A2 Class 1, y = +1 (buys_computer = yes) Class 2, y = −1 (buys_computer = no) Figure 9.10 A simple 2-D case showing linearly inseparable data. Unlike the linear separable data of Figure 9.7, here it is not possible to draw a straight line to separate the classes. Instead, the decision boundary is nonlinear. 414 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods Example 9.2 Nonlinear transformation of original input data into a higher dimensional space. Consider the following example. A 3-D input vector X = (x1, x2, x3) is mapped into a 6-D space, Z, using the mappings φ1(X) = x1, φ2(X) = x2, φ3(X) = x3, φ4(X) = (x1)2, φ5(X) = x1x2, and φ6(X) = x1x3. A decision hyperplane in the new space is d(Z) = WZ + b, where W and Z are vectors. This is linear. We solve for W and b and then substitute back so that the linear decision hyperplane in the new (Z) space corresponds to a nonlinear second-order polynomial in the original 3-D input space: d(Z) = w1x1 + w2x2 + w3x3 + w4(x1)2 + w5x1x2 + w6x1x3 + b = w1z1 + w2z2 + w3z3 + w4z4 + w5z5 + w6z6 + b. But there are some problems. First, how do we choose the nonlinear mapping to a higher dimensional space? Second, the computation involved will be costly. Refer to Eq. (9.19) for the classiﬁcation of a test tuple, XT. Given the test tuple, we have to com- pute its dot product with every one of the support vectors.3 In training, we have to compute a similar dot product several times in order to ﬁnd the MMH. This is espe- cially expensive. Hence, the dot product computation required is very heavy and costly. We need another trick! Luckily, we can use another math trick. It so happens that in solving the quadratic optimization problem of the linear SVM (i.e., when searching for a linear SVM in the new higher dimensional space), the training tuples appear only in the form of dot prod- ucts, φ(Xi) · φ(Xj), where φ(X) is simply the nonlinear mapping function applied to transform the training tuples. Instead of computing the dot product on the transformed data tuples, it turns out that it is mathematically equivalent to instead apply a kernel function, K(Xi, Xj), to the original input data. That is, K(Xi, Xj) = φ(Xi) · φ(Xj). (9.20) In other words, everywhere that φ(Xi) · φ(Xj) appears in the training algorithm, we can replace it with K(Xi,Xj). In this way, all calculations are made in the original input space, which is of potentially much lower dimensionality! We can safely avoid the mapping—it turns out that we don’t even have to know what the mapping is! We will talk more later about what kinds of functions can be used as kernel functions for this problem. After applying this trick, we can then proceed to ﬁnd a maximal separating hyper- plane. The procedure is similar to that described in Section 9.3.1, although it involves placing a user-speciﬁed upper bound, C, on the Lagrange multipliers, αi. This upper bound is best determined experimentally. “What are some of the kernel functions that could be used?” Properties of the kinds of kernel functions that could be used to replace the dot product scenario just described 3The dot product of two vectors, XT = (xT 1 , xT 2 ,..., xT n ) and Xi = (xi1, xi2,..., xin) is xT 1 xi1 + xT 2 xi2 + ··· + xT n xin. Note that this involves one multiplication and one addition for each of the n dimensions. 9.4 Classiﬁcation Using Frequent Patterns 415 have been studied. Three admissible kernel functions are Polynomial kernel of degree h: K(Xi, Xj) = (Xi · Xj + 1)h Gaussian radial basis function kernel: K(Xi, Xj) = e−∥Xi−Xj∥2/2σ 2 Sigmoid kernel: K(Xi, Xj) = tanh(κXi · Xj −δ) Each of these results in a different nonlinear classiﬁer in (the original) input space. Neural network aﬁcionados will be interested to note that the resulting decision hyper- planes found for nonlinear SVMs are the same type as those found by other well-known neural network classiﬁers. For instance, an SVM with a Gaussian radial basis func- tion (RBF) gives the same decision hyperplane as a type of neural network known as a radial basis function network. An SVM with a sigmoid kernel is equivalent to a simple two-layer neural network known as a multilayer perceptron (with no hidden layers). There are no golden rules for determining which admissible kernel will result in the most accurate SVM. In practice, the kernel