and dist(o,c1)2 dist(o,c1)2 + dist(o,c2)2 , 506 Chapter 11 Advanced Cluster Analysis Y a (3, 3) c (9, 6) b (4, 10) d (14, 8) e (18, 11) f (21, 7) X o Figure 11.2 Data set for fuzzy clustering. Table 11.3 Intermediate Results from the First Three Iterations of Example 11.7’s EM Algorithm Iteration E-Step M-Step 1 MT = " 1 0 0.48 0.42 0.41 0.47 0 1 0.52 0.58 0.59 0.53 # c1 = (8.47, 5.12) c2 = (10.42, 8.99) 2 MT = " 0.73 0.49 0.91 0.26 0.33 0.42 0.27 0.51 0.09 0.74 0.67 0.58 # c1 = (8.51, 6.11) c2 = (14.42, 8.69) 3 MT = " 0.80 0.76 0.99 0.02 0.14 0.23 0.20 0.24 0.01 0.98 0.86 0.77 # c1 = (6.40, 6.24) c2 = (16.55, 8.64) respectively, where dist(,) is the Euclidean distance. The rationale is that, if o is close to c1 and dist(o,c1) is small, the membership degree of o with respect to c1 should be high. We also normalize the membership degrees so that the sum of degrees for an object is equal to 1. For point a, we have wa,c1 = 1 and wa,c2 = 0. That is, a exclusively belongs to c1. For point b, we have wb,c1 = 0 and wb,c2 = 1. For point c, we have wc,c1 = 41 45+41 = 0.48 and wc,c2 = 45 45+41 = 0.52. The degrees of membership of the other points are shown in the partition matrix in Table 11.3. In the M-step, we recalculate the centroids according to the partition matrix, minimizing the SSE given in Eq. (11.4). The new centroid should be adjusted to cj = X each point o w2 o,cjo X each point o w2 o,cj , (11.12) where j = 1,2. 11.1 Probabilistic Model-Based Clustering 507 In this example, c1 = 12 × 3 + 02 × 4 + 0.482 × 9 + 0.422 × 14 + 0.412 × 18 + 0.472 × 21 12 + 02 + 0.482 + 0.422 + 0.412 + 0.472 , 12 × 3 + 02 × 10 + 0.482 × 6 + 0.422 × 8 + 0.412 × 11 + 0.472 × 7 12 + 02 + 0.482 + 0.422 + 0.412 + 0.472  = (8.47,5.12) and c2 = 02 × 3 + 12 × 4 + 0.522 × 9 + 0.582 × 14 + 0.592 × 18 + 0.532 × 21 02 + 12 + 0.522 + 0.582 + 0.592 + 0.532 , 02 × 3 + 12 × 10 + 0.522 × 6 + 0.582 × 8 + 0.592 × 11 + 0.532 × 7 02 + 12 + 0.522 + 0.582 + 0.592 + 0.532  =(10.42,8.99). We repeat the iterations, where each iteration contains an E-step and an M-step. Table 11.3 shows the results from the ﬁrst three iterations. The algorithm stops when the cluster centers converge or the change is small enough. “How can we apply the EM algorithm to compute probabilistic model-based clustering?” Let’s use a univariate Gaussian mixture model (Example 11.6) to illustrate. Example 11.8 Using the EM algorithm for mixture models. Given a set of objects, O = {o1,...,on}, we want to mine a set of parameters, 2 = {21,...,2k}, such that P(O|2) in Eq. (11.11) is maximized, where 2j = (µj,σj) are the mean and standard deviation, respectively, of the jth univariate Gaussian distribution, (1 ≤j ≤k). We can apply the EM algorithm. We assign random values to parameters 2 as the initial values. We then iteratively conduct the E-step and the M-step as follows until the parameters converge or the change is sufﬁciently small. In the E-step, for each object, oi ∈O (1 ≤i ≤n), we calculate the probability that oi belongs to each distribution, that is, P(2j|oi,2) = P(oi|2j) Pk l=1 P(oi|2l) . (11.13) In the M-step, we adjust the parameters 2 so that the expected likelihood P(O|2) in Eq. (11.11) is maximized. This can be achieved by setting µj = 1 k n X i=1 oi P(2j|oi,2) Pn l=1 P(2j|ol,2) = 1 k Pn i=1 oiP(2j|oi,2) Pn i=1 P(2j|oi,2) (11.14) 508 Chapter 11 Advanced Cluster Analysis and σj = sPn i=1 P(2j|oi,2)(oi −uj)2 Pn i=1 P(2j|oi,2) . (11.15) In many applications, probabilistic model-based clustering has been shown to be effective because it is more general than partitioning methods and fuzzy clustering methods. A distinct advantage is that appropriate statistical models can be used to capture latent clusters. The EM algorithm is commonly used to handle many learning problems in data mining and statistics due to its simplicity. Note that, in general, the EM algorithm may not converge to the optimal solution. It may instead converge to a local maximum. Many heuristics have been explored to avoid this. For example, we could run the EM process multiple times using different random initial values. Furthermore, the EM algorithm can be very costly if the number of distributions is large or the data set contains very few observed data points. 11.2 Clustering High-Dimensional Data The clustering methods we have studied so far work well when the dimensionality is not high, that is, having less than 10 attributes. There are, however, important applications of high dimensionality. “How can we conduct cluster analysis on high-dimensional data?” Inthissection,westudyapproachestoclusteringhigh-dimensionaldata.Section11.2.1 starts with an overview of the major challenges and the approaches used. Methods for high-dimensional data clustering can be divided into two categories: subspace clustering methods (Section 11.2.2) and dimensionality reduction methods (Section 11.2.3). 11.2.1 Clustering High-Dimensional Data: Problems, Challenges, and Major Methodologies Before we present any speciﬁc methods for clustering high-dimensional data, let’s ﬁrst demonstrate the needs of cluster analysis on high-dimensional data using examples. We examine the challenges that call for new methods. We then categorize the major meth- ods according to whether they search for clusters in subspaces of the original space, or whether they create a new lower-dimensionality space and search for clusters there. In some applications, a data object may be described by 10 or more attributes. Such objects are referred to as a high-dimensional data space. Example 11.9 High-dimensional data and clustering. AllElectronics keeps track of the products pur- chased by every customer. As a customer-relationship manager, you want to cluster customers into groups according to what they purchased from AllElectronics. 11.2 Clustering High-Dimensional Data 509 Table 11.4 Customer Purchase Data Customer P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6 P7 P8 P9 P10 Ada 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Bob 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 Cathy 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 The customer purchase data are of very high dimensionality. AllElectronics carries tens of thousands of products. Therefore, a customer’s purchase proﬁle, which is a vector of the products carried by the company, has tens of thousands of dimensions. “Are the traditional distance measures, which are frequently used in low-dimensional cluster analysis, also effective on high-dimensional data?” Consider the customers in Table 11.4, where 10 products, P1, ..., P10, are used in demonstration. If a customer purchases a product, a 1 is set at the corresponding bit; otherwise, a 0 appears. Let’s calculate the Euclidean distances (Eq. 2.16) among Ada, Bob, and Cathy. It is easy to see that dist(Ada,Bob) = dist(Bob,Cathy) = dist(Ada,Cathy) = √ 2. According to Euclidean distance, the three customers are equivalently similar (or dis- similar) to each other. However, a close look tells us that Ada should be more similar to Cathy than to Bob because Ada and Cathy share one common purchased item, P1. As shown in Example 11.9, the traditional distance measures can be ineffective on high-dimensional data. Such distance measures may be dominated by the noise in many dimensions. Therefore, clusters in the full, high-dimensional space can be unreliable, and ﬁnding such clusters may not be meaningful. “Then what kinds of clusters are meaningful on high-dimensional data?” For cluster analysis of high-dimensional data, we still want to group similar objects together. How- ever, the data space is often too big and too messy. An additional challenge is that we need to ﬁnd not only clusters, but, for each cluster, a set of attributes that manifest the cluster. In other words, a cluster on high-dimensional data often is deﬁned using a small set of attributes instead of the full data space. Essentially, clustering high-dimensional data should return groups of objects as clusters (as conventional cluster analysis does), in addition to, for each cluster, the set of attributes that characterize the cluster. For example, in Table 11.4, to characterize the similarity between Ada and Cathy, P1 may be returned as the attribute because Ada and Cathy both purchased P1. Clustering high-dimensional data is the search for clusters and the space in which they exist. Thus, there are two major kinds of methods: Subspace clustering approaches search for clusters existing in subspaces of the given high-dimensional data space, where a subspace is deﬁned using a subset of attributes in the full space. Subspace clustering approaches are discussed in Section 11.2.2. 510 Chapter 11 Advanced Cluster Analysis Dimensionality reduction approaches try to construct a much lower-dimensional space and search for clusters in such a space. Often, a method may construct new dimensions by combining some dimensions from the original data. Dimensionality reduction methods are the topic of Section 11.2.4. In general, clustering high-dimensional data raises several new challenges in addition to those of conventional clustering: A major issue is how to create appropriate models for clusters in high-dimensional data. Unlike conventional clusters in low-dimensional spaces, clusters hidden in high-dimensional data are often signiﬁcantly smaller. For example, when clustering customer-purchase data, we would not expect many users to have similar purchase patterns. Searching for such small but meaningful clusters is like ﬁnding needles in a haystack. As shown before, the conventional distance measures can be ineffective. Instead, we often have to consider various more sophisticated techniques that can model correlations and consistency among objects in subspaces. There are typically an exponential number of possible subspaces or dimensionality reduction options, and thus the optimal solutions are often computationally pro- hibitive. For example, if the original data space has 1000 dimensions, and we want to ﬁnd clusters of dimensionality 10, then there are 1000 10 ! = 2.63 × 1023 possible subspaces. 11.2.2 Subspace Clustering Methods “How can we ﬁnd subspace clusters from high-dimensional data?” Many methods have been proposed. They generally can be categorized into three major groups: subspace search methods, correlation-based clustering methods, and biclustering methods. Subspace Search Methods A subspace search method searches various subspaces for clusters. Here, a cluster is a subset of objects that are similar to each other in a subspace. The similarity is often cap- tured by conventional measures such as distance or density. For example, the CLIQUE algorithm introduced in Section 10.5.2 is a subspace clustering method. It enumerates subspaces and the clusters in those subspaces in a dimensionality-increasing order, and applies antimonotonicity to prune subspaces in which no cluster may exist. A major challenge that subspace search methods face is how to search a series of subspaces effectively and efﬁciently. Generally there are two kinds of strategies: Bottom-up approaches start from low-dimensional subspaces and search higher- dimensional subspaces only when there may be clusters in those higher-dimensional 11.2 Clustering High-Dimensional Data 511 subspaces. Various pruning techniques are explored to reduce the number of higher- dimensional subspaces that need to be searched. CLIQUE is an example of a bottom-up approach. Top-down approaches start from the full space and search smaller and smaller sub- spaces recursively. Top-down approaches are effective only if the locality assumption holds, which require that the subspace of a cluster can be determined by the local neighborhood. Example 11.10 PROCLUS, a top-down subspace approach. PROCLUS is a k-medoid-like method that ﬁrst generates k potential cluster centers for a high-dimensional data set using a sample of the data set. It then reﬁnes the subspace clusters iteratively. In each itera- tion, for each of the current k-medoids, PROCLUS considers the local neighborhood of the medoid in the whole data set, and identiﬁes a subspace for the cluster by mini- mizing the standard deviation of the distances of the points in the neighborhood to the medoid on each dimension. Once all the subspaces for the medoids are deter- mined, each point in the data set is assigned to the closest medoid according to the corresponding subspace. Clusters and possible outliers are identiﬁed. In the next iter- ation, new medoids replace existing ones if doing so improves the clustering quality. Correlation-Based Clustering Methods While subspace search methods search for clusters with a similarity that is measured using conventional metrics like distance or density, correlation-based approaches can further discover clusters that are deﬁned by advanced correlation models. Example 11.11 A correlation-based approach using PCA. As an example, a PCA-based approach ﬁrst applies PCA (Principal Components Analysis; see Chapter 3) to derive a set of new, uncorrelated dimensions, and then mine clusters in the new space or its subspaces. In addition to PCA, other space transformations may be used, such as the Hough transform or fractal dimensions. For additional details on subspace search methods and correlation-based clustering methods, please refer to the bibliographic notes (Section 11.7). Biclustering Methods In some applications, we want to cluster both objects and attributes simultaneously. The resulting clusters are known as biclusters and meet four requirements: (1) only a small set of objects participate in a cluster; (2) a cluster only involves a small number of attributes; (3) an object may participate in multiple clusters, or does not participate in any cluster; and (4) an attribute may be involved in multiple clusters, or is not involved in any cluster. Section 11.2.3 discusses biclustering in detail. 512 Chapter 11 Advanced Cluster Analysis 11.2.3 Biclustering In the cluster analysis discussed so far, we cluster objects according to their attribute values. Objects and attributes are not treated in the same way. However, in some applica- tions, objects and attributes are deﬁned in a symmetric way, where data analysis involves searching data matrices for submatrices that show unique patterns as clusters. This kind of clustering technique belongs to the category of biclustering. This section ﬁrst introduces two motivating application examples of biclustering— gene expression and recommender systems. You will then learn about the different types of biclusters. Last, we present biclustering methods. Application Examples Biclustering techniques were ﬁrst proposed to address the needs for analyzing gene expression data. A gene is a unit of the passing-on of traits from a living organism to its offspring. Typically, a gene resides on a segment of DNA. Genes are critical for all living things because they specify all proteins and functional RNA chains. They hold the information to build and maintain a living organism’s cells and pass genetic traits to offspring. Synthesis of a functional gene product, either RNA or protein, relies on the process of gene expression. A genotype is the genetic makeup of a cell, an organism, or an individual. Phenotypes are observable characteristics of an organism. Gene expression is the most fundamental level in genetics in that genotypes cause phenotypes. Using DNA chips (also known as DNA microarrays) and other biological engineer- ing techniques, we can measure the expression level of a large number (possibly all) of an organism’s genes, in a number of different experimental conditions. Such conditions may correspond to different time points in an experiment or samples from different organs. Roughly speaking, the gene expression data or DNA microarray data are concep- tually a gene-sample/condition matrix, where each row corresponds to one gene, and each column corresponds to one sample or condition. Each element in the matrix is a real number and records the expression level of a gene under a speciﬁc condition. Figure 11.3 shows an illustration. From the clustering viewpoint, an interesting issue is that a gene expression data matrix can be analyzed in two dimensions—the gene dimension and the sample/ condition dimension. When analyzing in the gene dimension, we treat each gene as an object and treat the samples/conditions as attributes. By mining in the gene dimension, we may ﬁnd pat- terns shared by multiple genes, or cluster genes into groups. For example, we may ﬁnd a group of genes that express themselves similarly, which is highly interesting in bioinformatics, such as in ﬁnding pathways. When analyzing in the sample/condition dimension, we treat each sample/condition as an object and treat the genes as attributes. In this way, we may ﬁnd patterns of samples/conditions, or cluster samples/conditions into groups. For example, we may ﬁnd the differences in gene expression by comparing a group of tumor samples and nontumor samples. 11.2 Clustering High-Dimensional Data 513 Gene Sample/condition w11 w31 wn1 wn2 wnm w12 w32 w21 w22 w1m w2m w3m Figure 11.3 Microarrary data matrix. Example 11.12 Gene expression. Gene expression matrices are popular in bioinformatics research and development. For example, an important task is to classify a new gene using the expres- sion data of the gene and that of other genes in known classes. Symmetrically, we may classify a new sample (e.g., a new patient) using the expression data of the sample and that of samples in known classes (e.g., tumor and nontumor). Such tasks are invaluable in understanding the mechanisms of diseases and in clinical treatment. As can be seen, many gene expression data mining problems are highly related to cluster analysis. However, a challenge here is that, instead of clustering in one dimension (e.g., gene or sample/condition), in many cases we need to cluster in two dimensions simultaneously (e.g., both gene and sample/condition). Moreover, unlike the clustering models we have discussed so far, a cluster in a gene expression data matrix is a submatrix and usually has the following characteristics: Only a small set of genes participate in the cluster. The cluster involves only a small subset of samples/conditions. A gene may participate in multiple clusters, or may not participate in any cluster. A sample/condition may be involved in multiple clusters, or may not be involved in any cluster. To ﬁnd clusters in gene-sample/condition matrices, we need new clustering tech- niques that meet the following requirements for biclustering: A cluster of genes is deﬁned using only a subset of samples/conditions. A cluster of samples/conditions is deﬁned using only a subset of genes. 514 Chapter 11 Advanced Cluster Analysis The clusters are neither exclusive (e.g., where one gene can participate in multiple clusters) nor exhaustive (e.g., where a gene may not participate in any cluster). Biclustering is useful not only in bioinformatics, but also in other applications as well. Consider recommender systems as an example. Example 11.13 Using biclustering for a recommender system. AllElectronics collects data from cus- tomers’ evaluations of products and uses the data to recommend products to customers. The data can be modeled as a customer-product matrix, where each row represents a customer, and each column represents a product. Each element in the matrix represents a customer’s evaluation of a product, which may be a score (e.g., like, like somewhat, not like) or purchase behavior (e.g., buy or not). Figure 11.4 illustrates the structure. The customer-product matrix can be analyzed in two dimensions: the customer dimension and the product dimension. Treating each customer as an object and products as attributes, AllElectronics can ﬁnd customer groups that have similar preferences or purchase patterns. Using products as objects and customers as attributes, AllElectronics can mine product groups that are similar in customer interest. Moreover, AllElectronics can mine clusters in both customers and products simulta- neously. Such a cluster contains a subset of customers and involves a subset of products. For example, AllElectronics is highly interested in ﬁnding a group of customers who all like the same group of products. Such a cluster is a submatrix in the customer-product matrix, where all elements have a high value. Using such a cluster, AllElectronics can make recommendations in two directions. First, the company can recommend products to new customers who are similar to the customers in the cluster. Second, the company can recommend to customers new products that are similar to those involved in the cluster. As with biclusters in a gene expression data matrix, the biclusters in a customer- product matrix usually have the following characteristics: Only a small set of customers participate in a cluster. A cluster involves only a small subset of products. A customer can participate in multiple clusters, or may not participate in any cluster. Products w11 w12 ··· w1m Customers w21 w22 ··· w2m ··· ··· ··· ··· wn1 wn2 ··· wnm Figure 11.4 Customer–product matrix. 11.2 Clustering High-Dimensional Data 515 A product may be involved in multiple clusters, or may not be involved in any cluster. Biclustering can be applied to customer-product matrices to mine clusters satisfying these requirements. Types of Biclusters “How can we model biclusters and mine them?” Let’s start with some basic notation. For the sake of simplicity, we will use “genes” and “conditions” to refer to the two dimen- sions in our discussion. Our discussion can easily be extended to other applications. For example, we can simply replace “genes” and “conditions” by “customers” and “products” to tackle the customer-product biclustering problem. Let A = {a1,...,an} be a set of genes and B = {b1,...,bm} be a set of conditions. Let E = [eij] be a gene expression data matrix, that is, a gene-condition matrix, where 1 ≤ i ≤n and 1 ≤j ≤m. A submatrix I × J is deﬁned by a subset I ⊆A of genes and a subset J ⊆B of conditions. For example, in the matrix shown in Figure 11.5, {a1,a33,a86} × {b6,b12,b36,b99} is a submatrix. A bicluster is a submatrix where genes and conditions follow consistent patterns. We can deﬁne different types of biclusters based on such patterns. As the simplest case, a submatrix I × J (I ⊆A,J ⊆B) is a bicluster with constant val- ues if for any i ∈I and j ∈J, eij = c, where c is a constant. For example, the submatrix {a1,a33,a86} × {b6,b12,b36,b99} in Figure 11.5 is a bicluster with constant values. A bicluster is interesting if each row has a constant value, though different rows may have different values. A bicluster with constant values on rows is a submatrix I × J such that for any i ∈I and j ∈J, eij = c + αi, where αi is the adjustment for row i. For example, Figure 11.6 shows a bicluster with constant values on rows. Symmetrically, a bicluster with constant values on columns is a submatrix I × J such that for any i ∈I and j ∈J, eij = c + βj, where βj is the adjustment for column j. ··· b6 ··· b12 ··· b36 ··· b99 ··· a1 ··· 60 ··· 60 ··· 60 ··· 60 ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· a33 ··· 60 ··· 60 ··· 60 ··· 60 ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· a86 ··· 60 ··· 60 ··· 60 ··· 60 ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· Figure 11.5 Gene-condition matrix, a submatrix, and a bicluster. 516 Chapter 11 Advanced Cluster Analysis More generally, a bicluster is interesting if the rows change in a synchronized way with respect to the columns and vice versa. Mathematically, a bicluster with coherent values (also known as a pattern-based cluster) is a submatrix I × J such that for any i ∈I and j ∈J, eij = c + αi + βj, where αi and βj are the adjustment for row i and column j, respectively. For example, Figure 11.7 shows a bicluster with coherent values. It can be shown that I × J is a bicluster with coherent values if and only if for any i1,i2 ∈I and j1,j2 ∈J, then ei1j1 −ei2j1 = ei1j2 −ei2j2. Moreover, instead of using addition, we can deﬁne a bicluster with coherent values using multiplication, that is, eij = c ·  αi · βj  . Clearly, biclusters with constant values on rows or columns are special cases of biclusters with coherent values. In some applications, we may only be interested in the up- or down-regulated changes across genes or conditions without constraining the exact values. A biclus- ter with coherent evolutions on rows is a submatrix I × J such that for any i1,i2 ∈I and j1,j2 ∈J, (ei1j1 −ei1j2)(ei2j1 −ei2j2) ≥0. For example, Figure 11.8 shows a biclus- ter with coherent evolutions on rows. Symmetrically, we can deﬁne biclusters with coherent evolutions on columns. Next, we study how to mine biclusters. 10 10 10 10 10 20 20 20 20 20 50 50 50 50 50 0 0 0 0 0 Figure 11.6 Bicluster with constant values on rows. 10 50 30 70 20 20 60 40 80 30 50 90 70 110 60 0 40 20 60 10 Figure 11.7 Bicluster with coherent values. 10 50 30 70 20 20 100 50 1000 30 50 100 90 120 80 0 80 20 100 10 Figure 11.8 Bicluster with coherent evolutions on rows. 11.2 Clustering High-Dimensional Data 517 Biclustering Methods The previous speciﬁcation of the types of biclusters only considers ideal cases. In real data sets, such perfect biclusters rarely exist. When they do exist, they are usually very small. Instead, random noise can affect the readings of eij and thus prevent a bicluster in nature from appearing in a perfect shape. There are two major types of methods for discovering biclusters in data that may come with noise. Optimization-based methods conduct an iterative search. At each iteration, the submatrix with the highest signiﬁcance score is identiﬁed as a bicluster. The process terminates when a user-speciﬁed condition is met. Due to cost concerns in computation, greedy search is often employed to ﬁnd local optimal biclusters. Enu- meration methods use a tolerance threshold to specify the degree of noise allowed in the biclusters to be mined, and then tries to enumerate all submatrices of biclusters that satisfy the requirements. We use the δ-Cluster and MaPle algorithms as examples to illustrate these ideas. Optimization Using the δ-Cluster Algorithm For a submatrix, I × J, the mean of the ith row is eiJ = 1 |J| X j∈J eij. (11.16) Symmetrically, the mean of the jth column is eIj = 1 |I| X i∈I eij. (11.17) The mean of all elements in the submatrix is eIJ = 1 |I||J| X i∈I,j∈J eij = 1 |I| X i∈I eiJ = 1 |J| X j∈J eIj. (11.18) The quality of the submatrix as a bicluster can be measured by the mean-squared residue value as H(I × J) = 1 |I||J| X i∈I,j∈J (eij −eiJ −eIj + eIJ)2. (11.19) Submatrix I × J is a δ-bicluster if H(I × J) ≤δ, where δ ≥0 is a threshold. When δ = 0, I × J is a perfect bicluster with coherent values. By setting δ > 0, a user can specify the tolerance of average noise per element against a perfect bicluster, because in Eq. (11.19) the residue on each element is residue(eij) = eij −eiJ −eIj + eIJ. (11.20) A maximal δ-bicluster is a δ-bicluster I × J such that there does not exist another δ-bicluster I′ × J′, and I ⊆I′, J ⊆J′, and at least one inequality holds. Finding the 518 Chapter 11 Advanced Cluster Analysis maximal δ-bicluster of the largest size is computationally costly. Therefore, we can use a heuristic greedy search method to obtain a local optimal cluster. The algorithm works in two phases. In the deletion phase, we start from the whole matrix. While the mean-squared residue of the matrix is over δ, we iteratively remove rows and columns. At each iteration, for each row i, we compute the mean-squared residue as d(i) = 1 |J| X j∈J (eij −eiJ −eIj + eIJ)2. (11.21) Moreover, for each column j, we compute the mean-squared residue as d(j) = 1 |I| X i∈I (eij −eiJ −eIj + eIJ)2. (11.22) We remove the row or column of the largest mean-squared residue. At the end of this phase, we obtain a submatrix I × J that is a δ-bicluster. However, the submatrix may not be maximal. In the addition phase, we iteratively expand the δ-bicluster I × J obtained in the dele- tion phase as long as the δ-bicluster requirement is maintained. At each iteration, we consider rows and columns that are not involved in the current bicluster I × J by cal- culating their mean-squared residues. A row or column of the smallest mean-squared residue is added into the current δ-bicluster. This greedy algorithm can ﬁnd one δ-bicluster only. To ﬁnd multiple biclusters that do not have heavy overlaps, we can run the algorithm multiple times. After each execu- tion where a δ-bicluster is output, we can replace the elements in the output bicluster by random numbers. Although the greedy algorithm may ﬁnd neither the optimal biclusters nor all biclusters, it is very fast even on large matrices. Enumerating All Biclusters Using MaPle As mentioned, a submatrix I × J is a bicluster with coherent values if and only if for any i1,i2 ∈I and j1,j2 ∈J, ei1j1 −ei2j1 = ei1j2 −ei2j2. For any 2 × 2 submatrix of I × J, we can deﬁne a p-score as p-score ei1j1 ei1j2 ei2j1 ei2j2 ! = |(ei1j1 −ei2j1) −(ei1j2 −ei2j2)|. (11.23) A submatrix I × J is a δ-pCluster (for pattern-based cluster) if the p-score of every 2 × 2 submatrix of I × J is at most δ, where δ ≥0 is a threshold specifying a user’s tolerance of noise against a perfect bicluster. Here, the p-score controls the noise on every element in a bicluster, while the mean-squared residue captures the average noise. An interesting property of δ-pCluster is that if I × J is a δ-pCluster, then every x × y (x,y ≥2) submatrix of I × J is also a δ-pCluster. This monotonicity enables 11.2 Clustering High-Dimensional Data 519 us to obtain a succinct representation of nonredundant δ-pClusters. A δ-pCluster is maximal if no more rows or columns can be added into the cluster while maintaining the δ-pCluster property. To avoid redundancy, instead of ﬁnding all δ-pClusters, we only need to compute all maximal δ-pClusters. MaPle is an algorithm that enumerates all maximal δ-pClusters. It systematically enumerates every combination of conditions using a set enumeration tree and a depth- ﬁrst search. This enumeration framework is the same as the pattern-growth methods for frequent pattern mining (Chapter 6). Consider gene expression data. For each con- dition combination, J, MaPle ﬁnds the maximal subsets of genes, I, such that I × J is a δ-pCluster. If I × J is not a submatrix of another δ-pCluster, then I × J is a maximal δ-pCluster. There may be a huge number of condition combinations. MaPle prunes many unfruitful combinations using the monotonicity of δ-pClusters. For a condition com- bination, J, if there does not exist a set of genes, I, such that I × J is a δ-pCluster, then we do not need to consider any superset of J. Moreover, we should consider I × J as a candidate of a δ-pCluster only if for every (|J| −1)-subset J′ of J, I × J′ is a δ-pCluster. MaPle also employs several pruning techniques to speed up the search while retaining the completeness of returning all maximal δ-pClusters. For example, when examining a current δ-pCluster, I × J, MaPle collects all the genes and conditions that may be added to expand the cluster. If these candidate genes and conditions together with I and J form a submatrix of a δ-pCluster that has already been found, then the search of I × J and any superset of J can be pruned. Interested readers may refer to the bibliographic notes for additional information on the MaPle algorithm (Section 11.7). An interesting observation here is that the search for maximal δ-pClusters in MaPle is somewhat similar to mining frequent closed itemsets. Consequently, MaPle borrows the depth-ﬁrst search framework and ideas from the pruning techniques of pattern-growth methods for frequent pattern mining. This is an example where frequent pattern mining and cluster analysis may share similar techniques and ideas. An advantage of MaPle and the other algorithms that enumerate all biclusters is that they guarantee the completeness of the results and do not miss any overlapping biclus- ters. However, a challenge for such enumeration algorithms is that they may become very time consuming if a matrix becomes very large, such as a customer-purchase matrix of hundreds of thousands of customers and millions of products. 11.2.4 Dimensionality Reduction Methods and Spectral Clustering Subspace clustering methods try to ﬁnd clusters in subspaces of the original data space. In some situations, it is more effective to construct a new space instead of using subspaces of the original data. This is the motivation behind dimensionality reduction methods for clustering high-dimensional data. Example 11.14 Clustering in a derived space. Consider the three clusters of points in Figure 11.9. It is not possible to cluster these points in any subspace of the original space, X × Y, because 520 Chapter 11 Advanced Cluster Analysis −0.707x+ 0.707y X O Y Figure 11.9 Clustering in a derived space may be more effective. all three clusters would end up being projected onto overlapping areas in the x and y axes. What if, instead, we construct a new dimension, − √ 2 2 x + √ 2 2 y (shown as a dashed line in the ﬁgure)? By projecting the points onto this new dimension, the three clusters become apparent. Although Example 11.14 involves only two dimensions, the idea of constructing a new space (so that any clustering structure that is hidden in the data becomes well man- ifested) can be extended to high-dimensional data. Preferably, the newly constructed space should have low dimensionality. There are many dimensionality reduction methods. A straightforward approach is to apply feature selection and extraction methods to the data set such as those discussed in Chapter 3. However, such methods may not be able to detect the clustering structure. Therefore, methods that combine feature extraction and clustering are preferred. In this section, we introduce spectral clustering, a group of methods that are effective in high- dimensional data applications. Figure 11.10 shows the general framework for spectral clustering approaches. The Ng-Jordan-Weiss algorithm is a spectral clustering method. Let’s have a look at each step of the framework. In doing so, we also note special conditions that apply to the Ng-Jordan-Weiss algorithm as an example. Given a set of objects, o1,...,on, the distance between each pair of objects, dist(oi,oj) (1 ≤i,j ≤n), and the desired number k of clusters, a spectral clustering approach works as follows. 1. Using the distance measure, calculate an afﬁnity matrix, W, such that Wij = e− dist(oi,oj) σ2 , where σ is a scaling parameter that controls how fast the afﬁnity Wij decreases as dist(oi,oj) increases. In the Ng-Jordan-Weiss algorithm, Wii is set to 0. 11.2 Clustering High-Dimensional Data 521 [wij] Affinity matrix Data A =f(w) Av= λv Clustering in the new space Compute leading k eigenvectors of A Project back to cluster the original data Figure 11.10 The framework of spectral clustering approaches. Source: Adapted from Slide 8 at http:// videolectures.net/micued08 azran mcl/. 2. Using the afﬁnity matrix W, derive a matrix A = f (W). The way in which this is done can vary. The Ng-Jordan-Weiss algorithm deﬁnes a matrix, D, as a diagonal matrix such that Dii is the sum of the ith row of W, that is, Dii = n X j=1 Wij. (11.24) A is then set to A = D−1 2 WD−1 2 . (11.25) 3. Find the k leading eigenvectors of A. Recall that the eigenvectors of a square matrix are the nonzero vectors that remain proportional to the original vector after being multiplied by the matrix. Mathematically, a vector v is an eigenvector of matrix A if Av = λv, where λ is called the corresponding eigenvalue. This step derives k new dimensions from A, which are based on the afﬁnity matrix W. Typically, k should be much smaller than the dimensionality of the original data. The Ng-Jordan-Weiss algorithm computes the k eigenvectors with the largest eigenvalues x1,...,xk of A. 4. Using the k leading eigenvectors, project the original data into the new space deﬁned by the k leading eigenvectors, and run a clustering algorithm such as k-means to ﬁnd k clusters. The Ng-Jordan-Weiss algorithm stacks the k largest eigenvectors in columns to form a matrix X = [x1x2 ···xk] ∈Rn×k. The algorithm forms a matrix Y by renormalizing each row in X to have unit length, that is, Yij = Xij qPk j=1 X2 ij . (11.26) The algorithm then treats each row in Y as a point in the k-dimensional space Rk, and runs k-means (or any other algorithm serving the partitioning purpose) to cluster the points into k clusters. 522 Chapter 11 Advanced Cluster Analysis 0 0.5 0 −0.5 10 20 30 40 50 60 0 1 0.5 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 0 0.5 0 −1 −0.5 10 20 30 40 50 60 0 1 0.5 −0.5 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 0 0.4 0.2 −0.2 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 0 1 0.5 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 V= [v1,v2,v3] U = [u1,u2,u3] W ;A Figure 11.11 The new dimensions and the clustering results of the Ng-Jordan-Weiss algorithm. Source: Adapted from Slide 9 at http://videolectures.net/micued08 azran mcl/. 5. Assign the original data points to clusters according to how the transformed points are assigned in the clusters obtained in step 4. In the Ng-Jordan-Weiss algorithm, the original object oi is assigned to the jth cluster if and only if matrix Y’s row i is assigned to the jth cluster as a result of step 4. In spectral clustering methods, the dimensionality of the new space is set to the desired number of clusters. This setting expects that each new dimension should be able to manifest a cluster. Example 11.15 The Ng-Jordan-Weiss algorithm. Consider the set of points in Figure 11.11. The data set, the afﬁnity matrix, the three largest eigenvectors, and the normalized vec- tors are shown. Note that with the three new dimensions (formed by the three largest eigenvectors), the clusters are easily detected. Spectral clustering is effective in high-dimensional applications such as image pro- cessing. Theoretically, it works well when certain conditions apply. Scalability, however, is a challenge. Computing eigenvectors on a large matrix is costly. Spectral clustering can be combined with other clustering methods, such as biclustering. Additional informa- tion on other dimensionality reduction clustering methods, such as kernel PCA, can be found in the bibliographic notes (Section 11.7). 11.3 Clustering Graph and Network Data Cluster analysis on graph and network data extracts valuable knowledge and informa- tion. Such data are increasingly popular in many applications. We discuss applications and challenges of clustering graph and network data in Section 11.3.1. Similarity mea- sures for this form of clustering are given in Section 11.3.2. You will learn about graph clustering methods in Section 11.3.3. In general, the terms graph and network can be used interchangeably. In the rest of this section, we mainly use the term graph. 11.3 Clustering Graph and Network Data 523 11.3.1 Applications and Challenges As a customer relationship manager at AllElectronics, you notice that a lot of data relating to customers and their purchase behavior can be preferably modeled using graphs. Example 11.16 Bipartite graph. The customer purchase behavior at AllElectronics can be represented in a bipartite graph. In a bipartite graph, vertices can be divided into two disjoint sets so that each edge connects a vertex in one set to a vertex in the other set. For the AllElectronics customer purchase data, one set of vertices represents customers, with one customer per vertex. The other set represents products, with one product per vertex. An edge connects a customer to a product, representing the purchase of the product by the customer. Figure 11.12 shows an illustration. “What kind of knowledge can we obtain by a cluster analysis of the customer-product bipartite graph?” By clustering the customers such that those customers buying similar sets of products are placed into one group, a customer relationship manager can make product recommendations. For example, suppose Ada belongs to a customer cluster in which most of the customers purchased a digital camera in the last 12 months, but Ada has yet to purchase one. As manager, you decide to recommend a digital camera to her. Alternatively, we can cluster products such that those products purchased by similar sets of customers are grouped together. This clustering information can also be used for product recommendations. For example, if a digital camera and a high-speed ﬂash memory card belong to the same product cluster, then when a customer purchases a digital camera, we can recommend the high-speed ﬂash memory card. Bipartite graphs are widely used in many applications. Consider another example. Example 11.17 Web search engines. In web search engines, search logs are archived to record user queries and the corresponding click-through information. (The click-through informa- tion tells us on which pages, given as a result of a search, the user clicked.) The query and click-through information can be represented using a bipartite graph, where the two sets Customers Products Figure 11.12 Bipartite graph representing customer-purchase data. 524 Chapter 11 Advanced Cluster Analysis of vertices correspond to queries and web pages, respectively. An edge links a query to a web page if a user clicks the web page when asking the query. Valuable information can be obtained by cluster analyses on the query–web page bipartite graph. For instance, we may identify queries posed in different languages, but that mean the same thing, if the click-through information for each query is similar. As another example, all the web pages on the Web form a directed graph, also known as the web graph, where each web page is a vertex, and each hyperlink is an edge pointing from a source page to a destination page. Cluster analysis on the web graph can disclose communities, ﬁnd hubs and authoritative web pages, and detect web spams. In addition to bipartite graphs, cluster analysis can also be applied to other types of graphs, including general graphs, as elaborated Example 11.18. Example 11.18 Social network. A social network is a social structure. It can be represented as a graph, where the vertices are individuals or organizations, and the links are interdependencies between the vertices, representing friendship, common interests, or collaborative activi- ties. AllElectronics’ customers form a social network, where each customer is a vertex, and an edge links two customers if they know each other. As customer relationship manager, you are interested in ﬁnding useful information that can be derived from AllElectronics’ social network through cluster analysis. You obtain clusters from the network, where customers in a cluster know each other or have friends in common. Customers within a cluster may inﬂuence one another regard- ing purchase decision making. Moreover, communication channels can be designed to inform the “heads” of clusters (i.e., the “best” connected people in the clusters), so that promotional information can be spread out quickly. Thus, you may use customer clustering to promote sales at AllElectronics. As another example, the authors of scientiﬁc publications form a social network, where the authors are vertices and two authors are connected by an edge if they co- authored a publication. The network is, in general, a weighted graph because an edge between two authors can carry a weight representing the strength of the collaboration such as how many publications the two authors (as the end vertices) coauthored. Clus- tering the coauthor network provides insight as to communities of authors and patterns of collaboration. “Are there any challenges speciﬁc to cluster analysis on graph and network data?” In most of the clustering methods discussed so far, objects are represented using a set of attributes. A unique feature of graph and network data is that only objects (as vertices) and relationships between them (as edges) are given. No dimensions or attributes are explicitly deﬁned. To conduct cluster analysis on graph and network data, there are two major new challenges. “How can we measure the similarity between two objects on a graph accordingly?” Typically, we cannot use conventional distance measures, such as Euclidean dis- tance. Instead, we need to develop new measures to quantify the similarity. Such 11.3 Clustering Graph and Network Data 525 measures often are not metric, and thus raise new challenges regarding the develop- ment of efﬁcient clustering methods. Similarity measures for graphs are discussed in Section 11.3.2. “How can we design clustering models and methods that are effective on graph and network data?” Graph and network data are often complicated, carrying topological structures that are more sophisticated than traditional cluster analysis applications. Many graph data sets are large, such as the web graph containing at least tens of billions of web pages in the publicly indexable Web. Graphs can also be sparse where, on average, a vertex is connected to only a small number of other vertices in the graph. To discover accurate and useful knowledge hidden deep in the data, a good clustering method has to accommodate these factors. Clustering methods for graph and network data are introduced in Section 11.3.3. 11.3.2 Similarity Measures “How can we measure the similarity or distance between two vertices in a graph?” In our discussion, we examine two types of measures: geodesic distance and distance based on random walk. Geodesic Distance A simple measure of the distance between two vertices in a graph is the shortest path between the vertices. Formally, the geodesic distance between two vertices is the length in terms of the number of edges of the shortest path between the vertices. For two vertices that are not connected in a graph, the geodesic distance is deﬁned as inﬁnite. Using geodesic distance, we can deﬁne several other useful measurements for graph analysis and clustering. Given a graph G = (V,E), where V is the set of vertices and E is the set of edges, we deﬁne the following: For a vertext v ∈V, the eccentricity of v, denoted eccen(v), is the largest geodesic distance between v and any other vertex u ∈V −{v}. The eccentricity of v captures how far away v is from its remotest vertex in the graph. The radius of graph G is the minimum eccentricity of all vertices. That is, r = min v∈V eccen(v). (11.27) The radius captures the distance between the “most central point” and the “farthest border” of the graph. The diameter of graph G is the maximum eccentricity of all vertices. That is, d = max v∈V eccen(v). (11.28) The diameter represents the largest distance between any pair of vertices. A peripheral vertex is a vertex that achieves the diameter. 526 Chapter 11 Advanced Cluster Analysis a b c e d Figure 11.13 A graph, G, where vertices c, d, and e are peripheral. Example 11.19 Measurements based on geodesic distance. Consider graph G in Figure 11.13. The eccentricity of a is 2, that is, eccen(a) = 2, eccen(b) = 2, and eccen(c) = eccen(d) = eccen(e) = 3. Thus, the radius of G is 2, and the diameter is 3. Note that it is not necessary that d = 2 × r. Vertices c, d, and e are peripheral vertices. SimRank: Similarity Based on Random Walk and Structural Context For some applications, geodesic distance may be inappropriate in measuring the simi- larity between vertices in a graph. Here we introduce SimRank, a similarity measure based on random walk and on the structural context of the graph. In mathematics, a random walk is a trajectory that consists of taking successive random steps. Example 11.20 Similarity between people in a social network. Let’s consider measuring the similarity between two vertices in the AllElectronics customer social network of Example 11.18. Here, similarity can be explained as the closeness between two participants in the net- work, that is, how close two people are in terms of the relationship represented by the social network. “How well can the geodesic distance measure similarity and closeness in such a network?” Suppose Ada and Bob are two customers in the network, and the network is undirected. The geodesic distance (i.e., the length of the shortest path between Ada and Bob) is the shortest path that a message can be passed from Ada to Bob and vice versa. However, this information is not useful for AllElectronics’ customer relationship management because the company typically does not want to send a speciﬁc message from one customer to another. Therefore, geodesic distance does not suit the application. “What does similarity mean in a social network?” We consider two ways to deﬁne similarity: Two customers are considered similar to one another if they have similar neighbors in the social network. This heuristic is intuitive because, in practice, two people receiving recommendations from a good number of common friends often make similar decisions. This kind of similarity is based on the local structure (i.e., the neighborhoods) of the vertices, and thus is called structural context–based similarity. 11.3 Clustering Graph and Network Data 527 Suppose AllElectronics sends promotional information to both Ada and Bob in the social network. Ada and Bob may randomly forward such information to their friends (or neighbors) in the network. The closeness between Ada and Bob can then be measured by the likelihood that other customers simultaneously receive the pro- motional information that was originally sent to Ada and Bob. This kind of similarity is based on the random walk reachability over the network, and thus is referred to as similarity based on random walk. Let’s have a closer look at what is meant by similarity based on structural context, and similarity based on random walk. The intuition behind similarity based on structural context is that two vertices in a graph are similar if they are connected to similar vertices. To measure such similarity, we need to deﬁne the notion of individual neighborhood. In a directed graph G = (V,E), where V is the set of vertices and E ⊆V × V is the set of edges, for a vertex v ∈V, the individual in-neighborhood of v is deﬁned as I(v) = {u|(u,v) ∈E}. (11.29) Symmetrically, we deﬁne the individual out-neighborhood of v as O(v) = {w|(v,w) ∈E}. (11.30) Following the intuition illustrated in Example 11.20, we deﬁne SimRank, a structural-context similarity, with a value that is between 0 and 1 for any pair of ver- tices. For any vertex, v ∈V, the similarity between the vertex and itself is s(v,v) = 1 because the neighborhoods are identical. For vertices u,v ∈V such that u ̸= v, we can deﬁne s(u,v) = C |I(u)||I(v)| X x∈I(u) X y∈I(v) s(x,y), (11.31) where C is a constant between 0 and 1. A vertex may not have any in-neighbors. Thus, we deﬁne Eq. (11.31) to be 0 when either I(u) or I(v) is ∅. Parameter C speciﬁes the rate of decay as similarity is propagated across edges. “How can we compute SimRank?” A straightforward method iteratively evaluates Eq. (11.31) until a ﬁxed point is reached. Let si(u,v) be the SimRank score calculated at the ith round. To begin, we set s0(u,v) = ( 0 if u ̸= v 1 if u = v. (11.32) We use Eq. (11.31) to compute si+1 from si as si+1(u,v) = C |I(u)||I(v)| X x∈I(u) X y∈I(v) si(x,y). (11.33) 528 Chapter 11 Advanced Cluster Analysis It can be shown that lim i→∞si(u,v) = s(u,v). Additional methods for approximating SimRank are given in the bibliographic notes (Section 11.7). Now, let’s consider similarity based on random walk. A directed graph is strongly connected if, for any two nodes u and v, there is a path from u to v and another path from v to u. In a strongly connected graph, G = (V,E), for any two vertices, u,v ∈V, we can deﬁne the expected distance from u to v as d(u,v) = X t:u⇝v P[t]l(t), (11.34) where u ⇝v is a path starting from u and ending at v that may contain cycles but does not reach v until the end. For a traveling tour, t = w1 →w2 →··· →wk, its length is l(t) = k −1. The probability of the tour is deﬁned as P[t] = (Qk−1 i=1 1 |O(wi)| if l(t) > 0 0 if l(t) = 0. (11.35) To measure the probability that a vertex w receives a message that originated simulta- neously from u and v, we extend the expected distance to the notion of expected meeting distance, that is, m(u,v) = X t:(u,v)⇝(x,x) P[t]l(t), (11.36) where (u,v) ⇝(x,x) is a pair of tours u ⇝x and v ⇝x of the same length. Using a constant C between 0 and 1, we deﬁne the expected meeting probability as p(u,v) = X t:(u,v)⇝(x,x) P[t]Cl(t), (11.37) which is a similarity measure based on random walk. Here, the parameter C speciﬁes the probability of continuing the walk at each step of the trajectory. It has been shown that s(u,v) = p(u,v) for any two vertices, u and v. That is, SimRank is based on both structural context and random walk. 11.3.3 Graph Clustering Methods Let’s consider how to conduct clustering on a graph. We ﬁrst describe the intuition behind graph clustering. We then discuss two general categories of graph clustering methods. To ﬁnd clusters in a graph, imagine cutting the graph into pieces, each piece being a cluster, such that the vertices within a cluster are well connected and the vertices in different clusters are connected in a much weaker way. Formally, for a graph, G = (V,E), 11.3 Clustering Graph and Network Data 529 a cut, C = (S,T), is a partitioning of the set of vertices V in G, that is, V = S ∪T and S ∩T = ∅. The cut set of a cut is the set of edges, {(u,v) ∈E|u ∈S,v ∈T}. The size of the cut is the number of edges in the cut set. For weighted graphs, the size of a cut is the sum of the weights of the edges in the cut set. “What kinds of cuts are good for deriving clusters in graphs?” In graph theory and some network applications, a minimum cut is of importance. A cut is minimum if the cut’s size is not greater than any other cut’s size. There are polynomial time algorithms to compute minimum cuts of graphs. Can we use these algorithms in graph clustering? Example 11.21 Cuts and clusters. Consider graph G in Figure 11.14. The graph has two clusters: {a,b,c,d,e,f } and {g,h,i,j,k}, and one outlier vertex, l. Consider cut C1 = ({a,b,c,d,e,f ,g,h,i,j,k},{l}). Only one edge, namely, (e,l), crosses the two partitions created by C1. Therefore, the cut set of C1 is {(e,l)} and the size of C1 is 1. (Note that the size of any cut in a connected graph cannot be smaller than 1.) As a minimum cut, C1 does not lead to a good clustering because it only separates the outlier vertex, l, from the rest of the graph. Cut C2 = ({a,b,c,d,e,f ,l},{g,h,i,j,k}) leads to a much better clustering than C1. The edges in the cut set of C2 are those connecting the two “natural clusters” in the graph. Speciﬁcally, for edges (d,h) and (e,k) that are in the cut set, most of the edges connecting d, h, e, and k belong to one cluster. Example 11.21 indicates that using a minimum cut is unlikely to lead to a good clus- tering. We are better off choosing a cut where, for each vertex u that is involved in an edge in the cut set, most of the edges connecting to u belong to one cluster. Formally, let deg(u) be the degree of u, that is, the number of edges connecting to u. The sparsity of a cut C = (S,T) is deﬁned as 8 = cut size min{|S|,|T|}. (11.38) Sparsest cut C2 Minimum cut C1 a b d e f g h i j k l c Figure 11.14 A graph G and two cuts. 530 Chapter 11 Advanced Cluster Analysis A cut is sparsest if its sparsity is not greater than the sparsity of any other cut. There may be more than one sparsest cut. In Example 11.21 and Figure 11.14, C2 is a sparsest cut. Using sparsity as the objective function, a sparsest cut tries to minimize the number of edges crossing the partitions and balance the partitions in size. Consider a clustering on a graph G = (V,E) that partitions the graph into k clusters. The modularity of a clustering assesses the quality of the clustering and is deﬁned as Q = k X i=1 li |E| −  di 2|E| 2! , (11.39) where li is the number of edges between vertices in the ith cluster, and di is the sum of the degrees of the vertices in the ith cluster. The