chosen does not generally make a large difference in resulting accuracy. SVM training always ﬁnds a global solution, unlike neural networks, such as backpropagation, where many local minima usually exist (Section 9.2.3). So far, we have described linear and nonlinear SVMs for binary (i.e., two-class) clas- siﬁcation. SVM classiﬁers can be combined for the multiclass case. See Section 9.7.1 for some strategies, such as training one classiﬁer per class and the use of error-correcting codes. A major research goal regarding SVMs is to improve the speed in training and testing so that SVMs may become a more feasible option for very large data sets (e.g., millions of support vectors). Other issues include determining the best kernel for a given data set and ﬁnding more efﬁcient methods for the multiclass case. 9.4 Classiﬁcation Using Frequent Patterns Frequent patterns show interesting relationships between attribute–value pairs that occur frequently in a given data set. For example, we may ﬁnd that the attribute–value pairs age = youth and credit = OK occur in 20% of data tuples describing AllElectronics customers who buy a computer. We can think of each attribute–value pair as an item, so the search for these frequent patterns is known as frequent pattern mining or frequent itemset mining. In Chapters 6 and 7, we saw how association rules are derived from frequent patterns, where the associations are commonly used to analyze the purchas- ing patterns of customers in a store. Such analysis is useful in many decision-making processes such as product placement, catalog design, and cross-marketing. In this section, we examine how frequent patterns can be used for classiﬁcation. Section 9.4.1 explores associative classiﬁcation, where association rules are generated from frequent patterns and used for classiﬁcation. The general idea is that we can search for strong associations between frequent patterns (conjunctions of attribute–value 416 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods pairs) and class labels. Section 9.4.2 explores discriminative frequent pattern–based classiﬁcation, where frequent patterns serve as combined features, which are considered in addition to single features when building a classiﬁcation model. Because frequent patterns explore highly conﬁdent associations among multiple attributes, frequent pattern–based classiﬁcation may overcome some constraints introduced by decision tree induction, which considers only one attribute at a time. Studies have shown many fre- quent pattern–based classiﬁcation methods to have greater accuracy and scalability than some traditional classiﬁcation methods such as C4.5. 9.4.1 Associative Classiﬁcation In this section, you will learn about associative classiﬁcation. The methods discussed are CBA, CMAR, and CPAR. Before we begin, however, let’s look at association rule mining in general. Association rules are mined in a two-step process consisting of frequent itemset mining followed by rule generation. The ﬁrst step searches for patterns of attribute–value pairs that occur repeatedly in a data set, where each attribute–value pair is considered an item. The resulting attribute–value pairs form frequent itemsets (also referred to as frequent pat- terns). The second step analyzes the frequent itemsets to generate association rules. All association rules must satisfy certain criteria regarding their “accuracy” (or conﬁdence) and the proportion of the data set that they actually represent (referred to as support). For example, the following is an association rule mined from a data set, D, shown with its conﬁdence and support: age = youth ∧credit = OK ⇒buys computer = yes [support = 20%, conﬁdence = 93%], (9.21) where ∧represents a logical “AND.” We will say more about conﬁdence and support later. More formally, let D be a data set of tuples. Each tuple in D is described by n attributes, A1, A2,..., An, and a class label attribute, Aclass. All continuous attributes are discretized and treated as categorical (or nominal) attributes. An item, p, is an attribute– value pair of the form (Ai, v), where Ai is an attribute taking a value, v. A data tuple X = (x1, x2,..., xn) satisﬁes an item, p = (Ai, v), if and only if xi = v, where xi is the value of the ith attribute of X. Association rules can have any number of items in the rule antecedent (left side) and any number of items in the rule consequent (right side). However, when mining association rules for use in classiﬁcation, we are only interested in association rules of the form p1 ∧p2 ∧...pl ⇒Aclass = C, where the rule antecedent is a conjunction of items, p1, p2,..., pl (l ≤n), associated with a class label, C. For a given rule, R, the percentage of tuples in D satisfying the rule antecedent that also have the class label C is called the conﬁdence of R. From a classiﬁcation point of view, this is akin to rule accuracy. For example, a con- ﬁdence of 93% for Rule (9.21) means that 93% of the customers in D who are young and have an OK credit rating belong to the class buys computer = yes. The percentage of 9.4 Classiﬁcation Using Frequent Patterns 417 tuples in D satisfying the rule antecedent and having class label C is called the support of R. A support of 20% for Rule (9.21) means that 20% of the customers in D are young, have an OK credit rating, and belong to the class buys computer = yes. In general, associative classiﬁcation consists of the following steps: 1. Mine the data for frequent itemsets, that is, ﬁnd commonly occurring attribute–value pairs in the data. 2. Analyze the frequent itemsets to generate association rules per class, which satisfy conﬁdence and support criteria. 3. Organize the rules to form a rule-based classiﬁer. Methods of associative classiﬁcation differ primarily in the approach used for frequent itemset mining and in how the derived rules are analyzed and used for classiﬁcation. We now look at some of the various methods for associative classiﬁcation. One of the earliest and simplest algorithms for associative classiﬁcation is CBA (Clas- siﬁcation Based on Associations). CBA uses an iterative approach to frequent itemset mining, similar to that described for Apriori in Section 6.2.1, where multiple passes are made over the data and the derived frequent itemsets are used to generate and test longer itemsets. In general, the number of passes made is equal to the length of the longest rule found. The complete set of rules satisfying minimum conﬁdence and minimum sup- port thresholds are found and then analyzed for inclusion in the classiﬁer. CBA uses a heuristic method to construct the classiﬁer, where the rules are ordered according to decreasing precedence based on their conﬁdence and support. If a set of rules has the same antecedent, then the rule with the highest conﬁdence is selected to represent the set. When classifying a new tuple, the ﬁrst rule satisfying the tuple is used to classify it. The classiﬁer also contains a default rule, having lowest precedence, which speciﬁes a default class for any new tuple that is not satisﬁed by any other rule in the classiﬁer. In this way, the set of rules making up the classiﬁer form a decision list. In general, CBA was empirically found to be more accurate than C4.5 on a good number of data sets. CMAR (Classiﬁcation based on Multiple Association Rules) differs from CBA in its strategy for frequent itemset mining and its construction of the classiﬁer. It also employs several rule pruning strategies with the help of a tree structure for efﬁcient storage and retrieval of rules. CMAR adopts a variant of the FP-growth algorithm to ﬁnd the complete set of rules satisfying the minimum conﬁdence and minimum support thresh- olds. FP-growth was described in Section 6.2.4. FP-growth uses a tree structure, called an FP-tree, to register all the frequent itemset information contained in the given data set, D. This requires only two scans of D. The frequent itemsets are then mined from the FP-tree. CMAR uses an enhanced FP-tree that maintains the distribution of class labels among tuples satisfying each frequent itemset. In this way, it is able to combine rule generation together with frequent itemset mining in a single step. CMAR employs another tree structure to store and retrieve rules efﬁciently and to prune rules based on conﬁdence, correlation, and database coverage. Rule pruning strategies are triggered whenever a rule is inserted into the tree. For example, given 418 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods two rules, R1 and R2, if the antecedent of R1 is more general than that of R2 and conf(R1) ≥conf(R2), then R2 is pruned. The rationale is that highly specialized rules with low conﬁdence can be pruned if a more generalized version with higher conﬁdence exists. CMAR also prunes rules for which the rule antecedent and class are not positively correlated, based on an χ2 test of statistical signiﬁcance. “If more than one rule applies, which one do we use?” As a classiﬁer, CMAR operates differently than CBA. Suppose that we are given a tuple X to classify and that only one rule satisﬁes or matches X.4 This case is trivial—we simply assign the rule’s class label. Suppose, instead, that more than one rule satisﬁes X. These rules form a set, S. Which rule would we use to determine the class label of X? CBA would assign the class label of the most conﬁdent rule among the rule set, S. CMAR instead considers multiple rules when making its class prediction. It divides the rules into groups according to class labels. All rules within a group share the same class label and each group has a distinct class label. CMAR uses a weighted χ2 measure to ﬁnd the “strongest” group of rules, based on the statistical correlation of rules within a group. It then assigns X the class label of the strongest group. In this way it considers multiple rules, rather than a single rule with highest conﬁdence, when predicting the class label of a new tuple. In experiments, CMAR had slightly higher average accuracy in comparison with CBA. Its runtime, scalability, and use of memory were found to be more efﬁcient. “Is there a way to cut down on the number of rules generated?” CBA and CMAR adopt methods of frequent itemset mining to generate candidate association rules, which include all conjunctions of attribute–value pairs (items) satisfying minimum support. These rules are then examined, and a subset is chosen to represent the classiﬁer. How- ever, such methods generate quite a large number of rules. CPAR (Classiﬁcation based on Predictive Association Rules) takes a different approach to rule generation, based on a rule generation algorithm for classiﬁcation known as FOIL (Section 8.4.3). FOIL builds rules to distinguish positive tuples (e.g., buys computer = yes) from negative tuples (e.g., buys computer = no). For multiclass problems, FOIL is applied to each class. That is, for a class, C, all tuples of class C are considered positive tuples, while the rest are consid- ered negative tuples. Rules are generated to distinguish C tuples from all others. Each time a rule is generated, the positive samples it satisﬁes (or covers) are removed until all the positive tuples in the data set are covered. In this way, fewer rules are generated. CPAR relaxes this step by allowing the covered tuples to remain under consideration, but reducing their weight. The process is repeated for each class. The resulting rules are merged to form the classiﬁer rule set. During classiﬁcation, CPAR employs a somewhat different multiple rule strategy than CMAR. If more than one rule satisﬁes a new tuple, X, the rules are divided into groups according to class, similar to CMAR. However, CPAR uses the best k rules of each group to predict the class label of X, based on expected accuracy. By considering the best k rules rather than all of a group’s rules, it avoids the inﬂuence of lower-ranked 4If a rule’s antecedent satisﬁes or matches X, then we say that the rule satisﬁes X. 9.4 Classiﬁcation Using Frequent Patterns 419 rules. CPAR’s accuracy on numerous data sets was shown to be close to that of CMAR. However, since CPAR generates far fewer rules than CMAR, it shows much better efﬁciency with large sets of training data. In summary, associative classiﬁcation offers an alternative classiﬁcation scheme by building rules based on conjunctions of attribute–value pairs that occur frequently in data. 9.4.2 Discriminative Frequent Pattern–Based Classiﬁcation From work on associative classiﬁcation, we see that frequent patterns reﬂect strong asso- ciations between attribute–value pairs (or items) in data and are useful for classiﬁcation. “But just how discriminative are frequent patterns for classiﬁcation?” Frequent patterns represent feature combinations. Let’s compare the discriminative power of frequent pat- terns and single features. Figure 9.11 plots the information gain of frequent patterns and single features (i.e., of pattern length 1) for three UCI data sets.5 The discrimination power of some frequent patterns is higher than that of single features. Frequent patterns map data to a higher dimensional space. They capture more underlying semantics of the data, and thus can hold greater expressive power than single features. “Why not consider frequent patterns as combined features, in addition to single features when building a classiﬁcation model?” This notion is the basis of frequent pattern– based classiﬁcation—the learning of a classiﬁcation model in the feature space of single attributes as well as frequent patterns. In this way, we transfer the original feature space to a larger space. This will likely increase the chance of including important features. Let’s get back to our earlier question: How discriminative are frequent patterns? Many of the frequent patterns generated in frequent itemset mining are indiscrimina- tive because they are based solely on support, without considering predictive power. That is, by deﬁnition, a pattern must satisfy a user-speciﬁed minimum support thresh- old, min sup, to be considered frequent. For example, if min sup, is, say, 5%, a pattern is frequent if it occurs in 5% of the data tuples. Consider Figure 9.12, which plots infor- mation gain versus pattern frequency (support) for three UCI data sets. A theoretical upper bound on information gain, which was derived analytically, is also plotted. The ﬁgure shows that the discriminative power (assessed here as information gain) of low- frequency patterns is bounded by a small value. This is due to the patterns’ limited coverage of the data set. Similarly, the discriminative power of very high-frequency pat- terns is also bounded by a small value, which is due to their commonness in the data. The upper bound of information gain is a function of pattern frequency. The information gain upper bound increases monotonically with pattern frequency. These observations can be conﬁrmed analytically. Patterns with medium-large supports (e.g., support = 300 in Figure 9.12a) may be discriminative or not. Thus, not every frequent pattern is useful. 5The University of California at Irvine (UCI) archives several large data sets at http://kdd.ics.uci.edu/. These are commonly used by researchers for the testing and comparison of machine learning and data mining algorithms. 420 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods 0.35 Pattern length (c) Sonar Information gain 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 Pattern length Pattern length (a) Austral (b) Cleve 0 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 Information gain Information gain 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 Figure 9.11 Single feature versus frequent pattern: Information gain is plotted for single features (pat- terns of length 1, indicated by arrows) and frequent patterns (combined features) for three UCI data sets. Source: Adapted from Cheng, Yan, Han, and Hsu [CYHH07]. If we were to add all the frequent patterns to the feature space, the resulting feature space would be huge. This slows down the model learning process and may also lead to decreased accuracy due to a form of overﬁtting in which there are too many features. Many of the patterns may be redundant. Therefore, it’s a good idea to apply feature selec- tion to eliminate the less discriminative and redundant frequent patterns as features. The general framework for discriminative frequent pattern–based classiﬁcation is as follows. 1. Feature generation: The data, D, are partitioned according to class label. Use fre- quent itemset mining to discover frequent patterns in each partition, satisfying minimum support. The collection of frequent patterns, F, makes up the feature candidates. 2. Feature selection: Apply feature selection to F, resulting in FS, the set of selected (more discriminating) frequent patterns. Information gain, Fisher score, or other evaluation measures can be used for this step. Relevancy checking can also be 9.4 Classiﬁcation Using Frequent Patterns 421 InfoGain 1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 00 100 200 300 400 500 (a) Austral (b) Breast 600 700 1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 00 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 (c) Sonar 0 100 50 150 200 250 1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0 InfoGain InfoGain Support Support Support Information gain Information gain Information gain IGUpperBound IGUpperBound IGUpperBound Figure 9.12 Information gain versus pattern frequency (support) for three UCI data sets. A theoretical upper bound on information gain (IGUpperBound) is also shown. Source: Adapted from Cheng, Yan, Han, and Hsu [CYHH07]. incorporated into this step to weed out redundant patterns. The data set D is trans- formed to D′, where the feature space now includes the single features as well as the selected frequent patterns, FS. 3. Learning of classiﬁcation model: A classiﬁer is built on the data set D′. Any learning algorithm can be used as the classiﬁcation model. The general framework is summarized in Figure 9.13(a), where the discriminative patterns are represented by dark circles. Although the approach is straightforward, we can encounter a computational bottleneck by having to ﬁrst ﬁnd all the frequent patterns, and then analyze each one for selection. The amount of frequent patterns found can be huge due to the explosive number of pattern combinations between items. 422 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods Data set Mine Select Transform Data set Compact tree Discriminative patterns Search Direct Frequent patterns (a) (b) Discriminative patterns Two-step Figure 9.13 A framework for frequent pattern–based classiﬁcation: (a) a two-step general approach versus (b) the direct approach of DDPMine. To improve the efﬁciency of the general framework, consider condensing steps 1 and 2 into just one step. That is, rather than generating the complete set of frequent patterns, it’s possible to mine only the highly discriminative ones. This more direct approach is referred to as direct discriminative pattern mining. The DDPMine algorithm follows this approach, as illustrated in Figure 9.13(b). It ﬁrst transforms the training data into a compact tree structure known as a frequent pattern tree, or FP-tree (Section 6.2.4), which holds all of the attribute–value (itemset) association information. It then searches for discriminative patterns on the tree. The approach is direct in that it avoids generat- ing a large number of indiscriminative patterns. It incrementally reduces the problem by eliminating training tuples, thereby progressively shrinking the FP-tree. This further speeds up the mining process. By choosing to transform the original data to an FP-tree, DDPMine avoids gener- ating redundant patterns because an FP-tree stores only the closed frequent patterns. By deﬁnition, any subpattern, β, of a closed pattern, α, is redundant with respect to α (Section 6.1.2). DDPMine directly mines the discriminative patterns and integrates feature selection into the mining framework. The theoretical upper bound on infor- mation gain is used to facilitate a branch-and-bound search, which prunes the search space signiﬁcantly. Experimental results show that DDPMine achieves orders of mag- nitude speedup over the two-step approach without decline in classiﬁcation accuracy. DDPMine also outperforms state-of-the-art associative classiﬁcation methods in terms of both accuracy and efﬁciency. 9.5 Lazy Learners (or Learning from Your Neighbors) The classiﬁcation methods discussed so far in this book—decision tree induction, Bayesian classiﬁcation, rule-based classiﬁcation, classiﬁcation by backpropagation, support vector machines, and classiﬁcation based on association rule mining—are all 9.5 Lazy Learners (or Learning from Your Neighbors) 423 examples of eager learners. Eager learners, when given a set of training tuples, will construct a generalization (i.e., classiﬁcation) model before receiving new (e.g., test) tuples to classify. We can think of the learned model as being ready and eager to classify previously unseen tuples. Imagine a contrasting lazy approach, in which the learner instead waits until the last minute before doing any model construction to classify a given test tuple. That is, when given a training tuple, a lazy learner simply stores it (or does only a little minor pro- cessing) and waits until it is given a test tuple. Only when it sees the test tuple does it perform generalization to classify the tuple based on its similarity to the stored train- ing tuples. Unlike eager learning methods, lazy learners do less work when a training tuple is presented and more work when making a classiﬁcation or numeric prediction. Because lazy learners store the training tuples or “instances,” they are also referred to as instance-based learners, even though all learning is essentially based on instances. When making a classiﬁcation or numeric prediction, lazy learners can be compu- tationally expensive. They require efﬁcient storage techniques and are well suited to implementation on parallel hardware. They offer little explanation or insight into the data’s structure. Lazy learners, however, naturally support incremental learning. They are able to model complex decision spaces having hyperpolygonal shapes that may not be as easily describable by other learning algorithms (such as hyperrectangular shapes modeled by decision trees). In this section, we look at two examples of lazy learners: k-nearest-neighbor classiﬁers (Section 9.5.1) and case-based reasoning classiﬁers (Section 9.5.2). 9.5.1 k-Nearest-Neighbor Classiﬁers The k-nearest-neighbor method was ﬁrst described in the early 1950s. The method is labor intensive when given large training sets, and did not gain popularity until the 1960s when increased computing power became available. It has since been widely used in the area of pattern recognition. Nearest-neighbor classiﬁers are based on learning by analogy, that is, by compar- ing a given test tuple with training tuples that are similar to it. The training tuples are described by n attributes. Each tuple represents a point in an n-dimensional space. In this way, all the training tuples are stored in an n-dimensional pattern space. When given an unknown tuple, a k-nearest-neighbor classiﬁer searches the pattern space for the k training tuples that are closest to the unknown tuple. These k training tuples are the k “nearest neighbors” of the unknown tuple. “Closeness” is deﬁned in terms of a distance metric, such as Euclidean distance. The Euclidean distance between two points or tuples, say, X1 = (x11, x12,..., x1n) and X2 = (x21, x22,..., x2n), is dist(X1, X2) = v u u t n X i=1 (x1i −x2i)2. (9.22) 424 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods In other words, for each numeric attribute, we take the difference between the corre- sponding values of that attribute in tuple X1 and in tuple X2, square this difference, and accumulate it. The square root is taken of the total accumulated distance count. Typically, we normalize the values of each attribute before using Eq. (9.22). This helps prevent attributes with initially large ranges (e.g., income) from outweighing attributes with initially smaller ranges (e.g., binary attributes). Min-max normalization, for exam- ple, can be used to transform a value v of a numeric attribute A to v ′ in the range [0, 1] by computing v ′ = v −minA maxA −minA , (9.23) where minA and maxA are the minimum and maximum values of attribute A. Chapter 3 describes other methods for data normalization as a form of data transformation. For k-nearest-neighbor classiﬁcation, the unknown tuple is assigned the most com- mon class among its k-nearest neighbors. When k = 1, the unknown tuple is assigned the class of the training tuple that is closest to it in pattern space. Nearest-neighbor clas- siﬁers can also be used for numeric prediction, that is, to return a real-valued prediction for a given unknown tuple. In this case, the classiﬁer returns the average value of the real-valued labels associated with the k-nearest neighbors of the unknown tuple. “But how can distance be computed for attributes that are not numeric, but nominal (or categorical) such as color?” The previous discussion assumes that the attributes used to describe the tuples are all numeric. For nominal attributes, a simple method is to compare the corresponding value of the attribute in tuple X1 with that in tuple X2. If the two are identical (e.g., tuples X1 and X2 both have the color blue), then the difference between the two is taken as 0. If the two are different (e.g., tuple X1 is blue but tuple X2 is red), then the difference is considered to be 1. Other methods may incorporate more sophisticated schemes for differential grading (e.g., where a larger difference score is assigned, say, for blue and white than for blue and black). “What about missing values?” In general, if the value of a given attribute A is missing in tuple X1 and/or in tuple X2, we assume the maximum possible difference. Suppose that each of the attributes has been mapped to the range [0, 1]. For nominal attributes, we take the difference value to be 1 if either one or both of the corresponding values of A are missing. If A is numeric and missing from both tuples X1 and X2, then the difference is also taken to be 1. If only one value is missing and the other (which we will call v ′) is present and normalized, then we can take the difference to be either |1 −v ′| or |0 −v ′| (i.e., 1 −v ′ or v ′), whichever is greater. “How can I determine a good value for k, the number of neighbors?” This can be deter- mined experimentally. Starting with k = 1, we use a test set to estimate the error rate of the classiﬁer. This process can be repeated each time by incrementing k to allow for one more neighbor. The k value that gives the minimum error rate may be selected. In general, the larger the number of training tuples, the larger the value of k will be (so that classiﬁcation and numeric prediction decisions can be based on a larger portion of the stored tuples). As the number of training tuples approaches inﬁnity and k = 1, the 9.5 Lazy Learners (or Learning from Your Neighbors) 425 error rate can be no worse than twice the Bayes error rate (the latter being the theoretical minimum). If k also approaches inﬁnity, the error rate approaches the Bayes error rate. Nearest-neighbor classiﬁers use distance-based comparisons that intrinsically assign equal weight to each attribute. They therefore can suffer from poor accuracy when given noisy or irrelevant attributes. The method, however, has been modiﬁed to incorporate attribute weighting and the pruning of noisy data tuples. The choice of a distance metric can be critical. The Manhattan (city block) distance (Section 2.4.4), or other distance measurements, may also be used. Nearest-neighbor classiﬁers can be extremely slow when classifying test tuples. If D is a training database of |D| tuples and k = 1, then O(|D|) comparisons are required to classify a given test tuple. By presorting and arranging the stored tuples into search trees, the number of comparisons can be reduced to O(log(|D|). Parallel implementation can reduce the running time to a constant, that is, O(1), which is independent of |D|. Other techniques to speed up classiﬁcation time include the use of partial distance calculations and editing the stored tuples. In the partial distance method, we compute the distance based on a subset of the n attributes. If this distance exceeds a threshold, then further computation for the given stored tuple is halted, and the process moves on to the next stored tuple. The editing method removes training tuples that prove useless. This method is also referred to as pruning or condensing because it reduces the total number of tuples stored. 9.5.2 Case-Based Reasoning Case-based reasoning (CBR) classiﬁers use a database of problem solutions to solve new problems. Unlike nearest-neighbor classiﬁers, which store training tuples as points in Euclidean space, CBR stores the tuples or “cases” for problem solving as complex symbolic descriptions. Business applications of CBR include problem resolution for customer service help desks, where cases describe product-related diagnostic problems. CBR has also been applied to areas such as engineering and law, where cases are either technical designs or legal rulings, respectively. Medical education is another area for CBR, where patient case histories and treatments are used to help diagnose and treat new patients. When given a new case to classify, a case-based reasoner will ﬁrst check if an iden- tical training case exists. If one is found, then the accompanying solution to that case is returned. If no identical case is found, then the case-based reasoner will search for training cases having components that are similar to those of the new case. Concep- tually, these training cases may be considered as neighbors of the new case. If cases are represented as graphs, this involves searching for subgraphs that are similar to sub- graphs within the new case. The case-based reasoner tries to combine the solutions of the neighboring training cases to propose a solution for the new case. If incompatibili- ties arise with the individual solutions, then backtracking to search for other solutions may be necessary. The case-based reasoner may employ background knowledge and problem-solving strategies to propose a feasible combined solution. 426 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods Challenges in case-based reasoning include ﬁnding a good similarity metric (e.g., for matching subgraphs) and suitable methods for combining solutions. Other challenges include the selection of salient features for indexing training cases and the development of efﬁcient indexing techniques. A trade-off between accuracy and efﬁciency evolves as the number of stored cases becomes very large. As this number increases, the case-based reasoner becomes more intelligent. After a certain point, however, the system’s efﬁciency will suffer as the time required to search for and process relevant cases increases. As with nearest-neighbor classiﬁers, one solution is to edit the training database. Cases that are redundant or that have not proved useful may be discarded for the sake of improved performance. These decisions, however, are not clear-cut and their automation remains an active area of research. 9.6 Other Classiﬁcation Methods In this section, we give a brief description of several other classiﬁcation methods, includ- ing genetic algorithms (Section 9.6.1), rough set approach (Section 9.6.2), and fuzzy set approaches (Section 9.6.3). In general, these methods are less commonly used for clas- siﬁcation in commercial data mining systems than the methods described earlier in this book. However, these methods show their strength in certain applications, and hence it is worthwhile to include them here. 9.6.1 Genetic Algorithms Genetic algorithms attempt to incorporate ideas of natural evolution. In general, genetic learning starts as follows. An initial population is created consisting of randomly generated rules. Each rule can be represented by a string of bits. As a simple example, suppose that samples in a given training set are described by two Boolean attributes, A1 and A2, and that there are two classes, C1 and C2. The rule “IF A1 AND NOT A2 THEN C2” can be encoded as the bit string “100,” where the two leftmost bits represent attributes A1 and A2, respectively, and the rightmost bit represents the class. Similarly, the rule “IF NOT A1 AND NOT A2 THEN C1” can be encoded as “001.” If an attribute has k values, where k > 2, then k bits may be used to encode the attribute’s values. Classes can be encoded in a similar fashion. Based on the notion of survival of the ﬁttest, a new population is formed to consist of the ﬁttest rules in the current population, as well as offspring of these rules. Typically, the ﬁtness of a rule is assessed by its classiﬁcation accuracy on a set of training samples. Offspring are created by applying genetic operators such as crossover and mutation. In crossover, substrings from pairs of rules are swapped to form new pairs of rules. In mutation, randomly selected bits in a rule’s string are inverted. The process of generating new populations based on prior populations of rules con- tinues until a population, P, evolves where each rule in P satisﬁes a prespeciﬁed ﬁtness threshold. 9.6 Other Classiﬁcation Methods 427 Genetic algorithms are easily parallelizable and have been used for classiﬁcation as well as other optimization problems. In data mining, they may be used to evaluate the ﬁtness of other algorithms. 9.6.2 Rough Set Approach Rough set theory can be used for classiﬁcation to discover structural relationships within imprecise or noisy data. It applies to discrete-valued attributes. Continuous-valued attributes must therefore be discretized before its use. Rough set theory is based on the establishment of equivalence classes within the given training data. All the data tuples forming an equivalence class are indiscernible, that is, the samples are identical with respect to the attributes describing the data. Given real-world data, it is common that some classes cannot be distinguished in terms of the available attributes. Rough sets can be used to approximately or “roughly” deﬁne such classes. A rough set deﬁnition for a given class, C, is approximated by two sets—a lower approximation of C and an upper approximation of C. The lower approximation of C consists of all the data tuples that, based on the knowledge of the attributes, are certain to belong to C without ambiguity. The upper approximation of C consists of all the tuples that, based on the knowledge of the attributes, cannot be described as not belonging to C. The lower and upper approximations for a class C are shown in Figure 9.14, where each rectangular region represents an equivalence class. Decision rules can be generated for each class. Typically, a decision table is used to represent the rules. Rough sets can also be used for attribute subset selection (or feature reduction, where attributes that do not contribute to the classiﬁcation of the given training data can be identiﬁed and removed) and relevance analysis (where the contribution or signiﬁcance of each attribute is assessed with respect to the classiﬁcation task). The problem of ﬁnd- ing the minimal subsets (reducts) of attributes that can describe all the concepts in the given data set is NP-hard. However, algorithms to reduce the computation intensity have been proposed. In one method, for example, a discernibility matrix is used that stores the differences between attribute values for each pair of data tuples. Rather than C Upper approximation of C Lower approximation of C Figure 9.14 A rough set approximation of class C’s set of tuples using lower and upper approximation sets of C. The rectangular regions represent equivalence classes. 428 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods searching on the entire training set, the matrix is instead searched to detect redundant attributes. 9.6.3 Fuzzy Set Approaches Rule-based systems for classiﬁcation have the disadvantage that they involve sharp cut- offs for continuous attributes. For example, consider the following rule for customer credit application approval. The rule essentially says that applications for customers who have had a job for two or more years and who have a high income (i.e., of at least $50,000) are approved: IF (years employed ≥2) AND (income ≥50,000) THEN credit = approved. (9.24) By Rule (9.24), a customer who has had a job for at least two years will receive credit if her income is, say, $50,000, but not if it is $49,000. Such harsh thresholding may seem unfair. Instead, we can discretize income into categories (e.g., {low income, medium income, high income}) and then apply fuzzy logic to allow “fuzzy” thresholds or boundaries to be deﬁned for each category (Figure 9.15). Rather than having a precise cutoff between categories, fuzzy logic uses truth values between 0.0 and 1.0 to represent the degree of membership that a certain value has in a given category. Each category then represents a fuzzy set. Hence, with fuzzy logic, we can capture the notion that an income of $49,000 is, more or less, high, although not as high as an income of $50,000. Fuzzy logic systems typically provide graphical tools to assist users in converting attribute values to fuzzy truth values. Fuzzy set theory is also known as possibility theory. It was proposed by LotﬁZadeh in 1965 as an alternative to traditional two-value logic and probability theory. It lets us work at a high abstraction level and offers a means for dealing with imprecise data 1.0 10K 20K 30K 40K 50K 60K 70K income 0.5 0 0 high medium low Fuzzy membership Figure 9.15 Fuzzy truth values for income, representing the degree of membership of income values with respect to the categories {low, medium, high}. Each category represents a fuzzy set. Note that a given income value, x, can have membership in more than one fuzzy set. The membership values of x in each fuzzy set do not have to total to 1. 9.7 Additional Topics Regarding Classiﬁcation 429 measurement. Most important, fuzzy set theory allows us to deal with vague or inexact facts. For example, being a member of a set of high incomes is inexact (e.g., if $50,000 is high, then what about $49,000? or $48,000?) Unlike the notion of traditional “crisp” sets where an element belongs to either a set S or its complement, in fuzzy set theory, elements can belong to more than one fuzzy set. For example, the income value $49,000 belongs to both the medium and high fuzzy sets, but to differing degrees. Using fuzzy set notation and following Figure 9.15, this can be shown as mmedium income($49,000) = 0.15 and mhigh income($49,000) = 0.96, where m denotes the membership function, that is operating on the fuzzy sets of medium income and high income, respectively. In fuzzy set theory, membership val- ues for a given element, x (e.g., for $49,000), do not have to sum to 1. This is unlike traditional probability theory, which is constrained by a summation axiom. Fuzzy set theory is useful for data mining systems performing rule-based classi- ﬁcation. It provides operations for combining fuzzy measurements. Suppose that in addition to the fuzzy sets for income, we deﬁned the fuzzy sets junior employee and senior employee for the attribute years employed. Suppose also that we have a rule that, say, tests high income and senior employee in the rule antecedent (IF part) for a given employee, x. If these two fuzzy measures are ANDed together, the minimum of their measure is taken as the measure of the rule. In other words, m(high income AND senior employee)(x) = min(mhigh income(x), msenior employee(x)). This is akin to saying that a chain is as strong as its weakest link. If the two measures are ORed, the maximum of their measure is taken as the measure of the rule. In other words, m(high income OR senior employee)(x) = max(mhigh income(x), msenior employee(x)). Intuitively, this is like saying that a rope is as strong as its strongest strand. Given a tuple to classify, more than one fuzzy rule may apply. Each applicable rule contributes a vote for membership in the categories. Typically, the truth values for each predicted category are summed, and these sums are combined. Several procedures exist for translating the resulting fuzzy output into a defuzziﬁed or crisp value that is returned by the system. Fuzzy logic systems have been used in numerous areas for classiﬁcation, including market research, ﬁnance, health care, and environmental engineering. 9.7 Additional Topics Regarding Classiﬁcation Most of the classiﬁcation algorithms we have studied handle multiple classes, but some, such as support vector machines, assume only two classes exist in the data. What adap- tations can be made to allow for when there are more than two classes? This question is addressed in Section 9.7.1 on multiclass classiﬁcation. 430 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods What can we do if we want to build a classiﬁer for data where only some of the data are class-labeled, but most are not? Document classiﬁcation, speech recognition, and information extraction are just a few examples of applications in which unlabeled data are abundant. Consider document classiﬁcation, for example. Suppose we want to build a model to automatically classify text documents like articles or web pages. In particular, we want the model to distinguish between hockey and football documents. We have a vast amount of documents available, yet the documents are not class-labeled. Recall that supervised learning requires a training set, that is, a set of classlabeled data. To have a human examine and assign a class label to individual documents (to form a training set) is time consuming and expensive. Speech recognition requires the accurate labeling of speech utterances by trained lin- guists. It was reported that 1 minute of speech takes 10 minutes to label, and annotating phonemes (basic units of sound) can take 400 times as long. Information extraction sys- tems are trained using labeled documents with detailed annotations. These are obtained by having human experts highlight items or relations of interest in text such as the names of companies or individuals. High-level expertise may be required for certain knowl- edge domains such as gene and disease mentions in biomedical information extraction. Clearly, the manual assignment of class labels to prepare a training set can be extremely costly, time consuming, and tedious. We study three approaches to classiﬁcation that are suitable for situations where there is an abundance of unlabeled data. Section 9.7.2 introduces semisupervised classiﬁ- cation, which builds a classiﬁer using both labeled and unlabeled data. Section 9.7.3 presents active learning, where the learning algorithm carefully selects a few of the un- labeled data tuples and asks a human to label only those tuples. Section 9.7.4 presents transfer learning, which aims to extract the knowledge from one or more source tasks (e.g., classifying camera reviews) and apply the knowledge to a target task (e.g., TV reviews). Each of these strategies can reduce the need to annotate large amounts of data, resulting in cost and time savings. 9.7.1 Multiclass Classiﬁcation Some classiﬁcation algorithms, such as support vector machines, are designed for binary classiﬁcation. How can we extend these algorithms to allow for multiclass classiﬁcation (i.e., classiﬁcation involving more than two classes)? A simple approach is one-versus-all (OVA). Given m classes, we train m binary clas- siﬁers, one for each class. Classiﬁer j is trained using tuples of class j as the positive class, and the remaining tuples as the negative class. It learns to return a positive value for class j and a negative value for the rest. To classify an unknown tuple, X, the set of classiﬁers vote as an ensemble. For example, if classiﬁer j predicts the positive class for X, then class j gets one vote. If it predicts the negative class for X, then each of the classes except j gets one vote. The class with the most votes is assigned to X. All-versus-all (AVA) is an alternative approach that learns a classiﬁer for each pair of classes. Given m classes, we construct m(m−1) 2 binary classiﬁers. A classiﬁer is trained 9.7 Additional Topics Regarding Classiﬁcation 431 using tuples of the two classes it should discriminate. To classify an unknown tuple, each classiﬁer votes. The tuple is assigned the class with the maximum number of votes. All-versus-all tends to be superior to one-versus-all. A problem with the previous schemes is that binary classiﬁers are sensitive to errors. If any classiﬁer makes an error, it can affect the vote count. Error-correcting codes can be used to improve the accuracy of multiclass classiﬁca- tion, not just in the previous situations, but for classiﬁcation in general. Error-correcting codes were originally designed to correct errors during data transmission for commu- nication tasks. For such tasks, the codes are used to add redundancy to the data being transmitted so that, even if some errors occur due to noise in the channel, the data can be correctly received at the other end. For multiclass classiﬁcation, even if some of the individual binary classiﬁers make a prediction error for a given unknown tuple, we may still be able to correctly label the tuple. An error-correcting code is assigned to each class, where each code is a bit vector. Figure 9.16 show an example of 7-bit codewords assigned to classes C1,C2,C3, and C4. We train one classiﬁer for each bit position. Therefore, in our example we train seven classiﬁers. If a classiﬁer makes an error, there is a better chance that we may still be able to predict the right class for a given unknown tuple because of the redundancy gained by having additional bits. The technique uses a distance measurement called the Hamming distance to guess the “closest” class in case of errors, and is illustrated in Example 9.3. Example 9.3 Multiclass classiﬁcation with error-correcting codes. Consider the 7-bit codewords associated with classes C1 to C4 in Figure 9.16. Suppose that, given an unknown tuple to label, the seven trained binary classiﬁers collectively output the codeword 0001010, which does not match a codeword for any of the four classes. A classiﬁcation error has obviously occurred, but can we ﬁgure out what the classiﬁcation most likely should be? We can try by using the Hamming distance, which is the number of different bits between two codewords. The Hamming distance between the output codeword and the codeword for C1 is 5 because ﬁve bits—namely, the ﬁrst, second, third, ﬁfth, and seventh—differ. Similarly, the Hamming distance between the output code and the codewords for C2 through C4 are 3, 3, and 1, respectively. Note that the output code- word is closest to the codeword for C4. That is, the smallest Hamming distance between the output and a class codeword is for class C4. Therefore, we assign C4 as the class label of the given tuple. Class Error-correcting codeword C1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 C2 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 C3 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 C4 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 Figure 9.16 Error-correcting codes for a multiclass classiﬁcation problem involving four classes. 432 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods Error-correcting codes can correct up to h−1 h 1-bit errors, where h is the minimum Hamming distance between any two codewords. If we use one bit per class, such as for 4-bit codewords for classes C1 through C4, then this is equivalent to the one-versus-all approach, and the codes are not sufﬁcient to self-correct. (Try it as an exercise.) When selecting error-correcting codes for multiclass classiﬁcation, there must be good row- wise and column-wise separation between the codewords. The greater the distance, the more likely that errors will be corrected. 9.7.2 Semi-Supervised Classiﬁcation Semi-supervised classiﬁcation uses labeled data and unlabeled data to build a classiﬁer. Let Xl = {(x1,y1),...,xl,yl)} be the set of labeled data and Xu = {xl+1,...,xn} be the set of unlabeled data. Here we describe a few examples of this approach for learning. Self-training is the simplest form of semi-supervised classiﬁcation. It ﬁrst builds a classiﬁer using the labeled data. The classiﬁer then tries to label the unlabeled data. The tuple with the most conﬁdent label prediction is added to the set of labeled data, and the process repeats (Figure 9.17). Although the method is easy to understand, a disadvantage is that it may reinforce errors. Cotraining is another form of semi-supervised classiﬁcation, where two or more classiﬁers teach each other. Each learner uses a different and ideally independent set of features for each tuple. Consider web page data, for example, where attributes relat- ing to the images on the page may be used as one set of features, while attributes relating to the corresponding text constitute another set of features for the same data. Each set Self-training 1. Select a learning method such as, say, Bayesian classiﬁcation. Build the classiﬁer using the labeled data, Xl. 2. Use the classiﬁer to label the unlabeled data, Xu. 3. Select the tuple x ∈Xu having the highest conﬁdence (most conﬁdent prediction). Add it and its predicted label to Xl. 4. Repeat (i.e., retrain the classiﬁer using the augmented set of labeled data). Cotraining 1. Deﬁne two separate nonoverlapping feature sets for the labeled data, Xl. 2. Train two classiﬁers, f1 and f2, on the labeled data, where f1 is trained using one of the feature sets and f2 is trained using the other. 3. Classify Xu with f1 and f2 separately. 4. Add the most conﬁdent (x,f1(x)) to the set of labeled data used by f2, where x ∈Xu. Similarly, add the most conﬁdent (x,f2(x)) to the set of labeled data used by f1. 5. Repeat. Figure 9.17 Self-training and cotraining methods of semi-supervised classiﬁcation. 9.7 Additional Topics Regarding Classiﬁcation 433 of features should be sufﬁcient to train a good classiﬁer. Suppose we split the feature set into two sets and train two classiﬁers, f1 and f2, where each classiﬁer is trained on a different set. Then, f1 and f2 are used to predict the class labels for the unlabeled data, Xu. Each classiﬁer then teaches the other in that the tuple having the most conﬁdent prediction from f1 is added to the set of labeled data for f2 (along with its label). Similarly, the tuple having the most conﬁdent prediction from f2 is added to the set of labeled data for f1. The method is summarized in Figure 9.17. Cotraining is less sensitive to errors than self-training. A difﬁculty is that the assumptions for its usage may not hold true, that is, it may not be possible to split the features into mutually exclusive and class-conditionally independent sets. Alternate approaches to semi-supervised learning exist. For example, we can model the joint probability distribution of the features and the labels. For the unlabeled data, the labels can then be treated as missing data. The EM algorithm (Chapter 11) can be used to maximize the likelihood of the model. Methods using support vector machines have also been proposed. 9.7.3 Active Learning Active learning is an iterative type of supervised learning that is suitable for situations where data are abundant, yet the class labels are scarce or expensive to obtain. The learn- ing algorithm is active in that it can purposefully query a user (e.g., a human oracle) for labels. The number of tuples used to learn a concept this way is often much smaller than the number required in typical supervised learning. “How does active learning work to overcome the labeling bottleneck?” To keep costs down, the active learner aims to achieve high accuracy using as few labeled instances as possible. Let D be all of data under consideration. Various strategies exist for active learning on D. Figure 9.18 illustrates a pool-based approach to active learning. Suppose that a small subset of D is class-labeled. This set is denoted L. U is the set of unlabeled data in D. It is also referred to as a pool of unlabeled data. An active learner begins with L as the initial training set. It then uses a querying function to carefully select one or more data samples from U and requests labels for them from an oracle (e.g., a human annotator). The newly labeled samples are added to L, which the learner then uses in a standard supervised way. The process repeats. The active learning goal is to achieve high accuracy using as few labeled tuples as possible. Active learning algorithms are typically evaluated with the use of learning curves, which plot accuracy as a function of the number of instances queried. Most of the active learning research focuses on how to choose the data tuples to be queried. Several frameworks have been proposed. Uncertainty sampling is the most common, where the active learner chooses to query the tuples which it is the least cer- tain how to label. Other strategies work to reduce the version space, that is, the subset of all hypotheses that are consistent with the observed training tuples. Alternatively, we may follow a decision-theoretic approach that estimates expected error reduction. This selects tuples that would result in the greatest reduction in the total number of 434 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods Learn a model Labeled training set Oracle (e.g., human annotator) Select queries Unlabeled pool U L Machine Learning Model Figure 9.18 The pool-based active learning cycle. Source: From Settles [Set10], Burr Settles Computer Sciences Technical Report 1648, University of Wisconsin–Madison; used with permission. incorrect predictions such as by reducing the expected entropy over U. This latter approach tends to be more computationally expensive. 9.7.4 Transfer Learning Suppose that AllElectronics has collected a number of customer reviews on a product such as a brand of camera. The classiﬁcation task is to automatically label the reviews as either positive or negative. This task is known as sentiment classiﬁcation. We could examine each review and annotate it by adding a positive or negative class label. The labeled reviews can then be used to train and test a classiﬁer to label future reviews of the product as either positive or negative. The manual effort involved in annotating the review data can be expensive and time consuming. Suppose that AllElectronics has customer reviews for other products as well such as TVs. The distribution of review data for different types of products can vary greatly. We cannot assume that the TV-review data will have the same distribution as the camera- review data; thus we must build a separate classiﬁcation model for the TV-review data. Examining and labeling the TV-review data to form a training set will require a lot of effort. In fact, we would need to label a large amount of the data to train the review- classiﬁcation models for each product. It would be nice if we could adapt an existing classiﬁcation model (e.g., the one we built for cameras) to help learn a classiﬁcation model for TVs. Such knowledge transfer would reduce the need to annotate a large amount of data, resulting in cost and time savings. This is the essence behind transfer learning. 9.7 Additional Topics Regarding Classiﬁcation 435 Learning system Learning system Learning system Learning system (a) Traditional learning Different tasks (b) Transfer learning Knowledge Source tasks Target task Figure 9.19 Transfer learning versus traditional learning. (a) Traditional learning methods build a new classiﬁer from scratch for each classiﬁcation task. (b) Transfer learning applies knowledge from a source classiﬁer to simplify the construction of a classiﬁer for a new, target task. Source: From Pan and Yang [PY10]; used with permission. Transfer learning aims to extract the knowledge from one or more source tasks and apply the knowledge to a target task. In our example, the source task is the classiﬁcation of camera reviews, and the target task is the classiﬁcation of TV reviews. Figure 9.19 illustrates a comparison between traditional learning methods and transfer learning. Traditional learning methods build a new classiﬁer for each new classiﬁcation task, based on available class-labeled training and test data. Transfer learning algorithms apply knowledge about source tasks when building a classiﬁer for a new (target) task. Con- struction of the resulting classiﬁer requires fewer training data and less training time. Traditional learning algorithms assume that the training data and test data are drawn from the same distribution and the same feature space. Thus, if the distribution changes, such methods need to rebuild the models from scratch. Transfer learning allows the distributions, tasks, and even the data domains used in training and testing to be different. Transfer learning is analogous to the way humans may apply their knowledge of a task to facilitate the learning of another task. For exam- ple, if we know how to play the recorder, we may apply our knowledge of note reading and music to simplify the task of learning to play the piano. Similarly, knowing Spanish may make it easier to learn Italian. Transfer learning is useful for common applications where the data become outdated or the distribution changes. Here we give two more examples. Consider web-document classiﬁcation, where we may have trained a classiﬁer to label, say, articles from vari- ous newsgroups according to predeﬁned categories. The web data that were used to train the classiﬁer can easily become outdated because the topics on the Web change frequently. Another application area for transfer learning is email spam ﬁltering. We could train a classiﬁer to label email as either “spam” or “not spam,” using email from a group of users. If new users come along, the distribution of their email can be different from the original group, hence the need to adapt the learned model to incorporate the new data. 436 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods There are various approaches to transfer learning, the most common of which is the instance-based transfer learning approach. This approach reweights some of the data from the source task and uses it to learn the target task. The TrAdaBoost (Trans- fer AdaBoost) algorithm exempliﬁes this approach. Consider our previous example of web-document