reduce the data rep- resentation. Data reduction trades accuracy for speed in response to the need to obtain quick approximate answers to queries on very large databases. Data reduc- tion techniques include singular value decomposition (the driving element behind principal components analysis), wavelets, regression, log-linear models, histograms, clustering, sampling, and the construction of index trees. Data compression: According to this theory, the basis of data mining is to compress the given data by encoding in terms of bits, association rules, decision trees, clusters, and so on. Encoding based on the minimum description length principle states that the “best” theory to infer from a data set is the one that minimizes the length of the theory and of the data when encoded, using the theory as a predictor for the data. This encoding is typically in bits. Probability and statistical theory: According to this theory, the basis of data min- ing is to discover joint probability distributions of random variables, for example, Bayesian belief networks or hierarchical Bayesian models. Microeconomic view: The microeconomic view considers data mining as the task of ﬁnding patterns that are interesting only to the extent that they can be used in the decision-making process of some enterprise (e.g., regarding marketing strategies and production plans). This view is one of utility, in which patterns are considered interesting if they can be acted on. Enterprises are regarded as facing optimization problems, where the object is to maximize the utility or value of a decision. In this theory, data mining becomes a nonlinear optimization problem. Pattern discovery and inductive databases: In this theory, the basis of data mining is to discover patterns occurring in the data such as associations, classiﬁcation mod- els, sequential patterns, and so on. Areas such as machine learning, neural network, association mining, sequential pattern mining, clustering, and several other subﬁelds contribute to this theory. A knowledge base can be viewed as a database consisting of data and patterns. A user interacts with the system by querying the data and the theory (i.e., patterns) in the knowledge base. Here, the knowledge base is actually an inductive database. These theories are not mutually exclusive. For example, pattern discovery can also be seen as a form of data reduction or data compression. Ideally, a theoretical frame- work should be able to model typical data mining tasks (e.g., association, classiﬁcation, and clustering), have a probabilistic nature, be able to handle different forms of data, and consider the iterative and interactive essence of data mining. Further efforts are required to establish a well-deﬁned framework for data mining that satisﬁes these requirements. 602 Chapter 13 Data Mining Trends and Research Frontiers 13.2.3 Visual and Audio Data Mining Visual data mining discovers implicit and useful knowledge from large data sets using data and/or knowledge visualization techniques. The human visual system is controlled by the eyes and brain, the latter of which can be thought of as a powerful, highly parallel processing and reasoning engine containing a large knowledge base. Visual data mining essentially combines the power of these components, making it a highly attractive and effective tool for the comprehension of data distributions, patterns, clusters, and outliers in data. Visual data mining can be viewed as an integration of two disciplines: data visualiza- tion and data mining. It is also closely related to computer graphics, multimedia systems, human–computer interaction, pattern recognition, and high-performance computing. In general, data visualization and data mining can be integrated in the following ways: Data visualization: Data in a database or data warehouse can be viewed at differ- ent granularity or abstraction levels, or as different combinations of attributes or dimensions. Data can be presented in various visual forms, such as boxplots, 3-D cubes, data distribution charts, curves, surfaces, and link graphs, as shown in the data visualization section of Chapter 2. Figures 13.4 and 13.5 from StatSoft show Figure 13.4 Boxplots showing multiple variable combinations in StatSoft. Source: www.statsoft.com. 13.2 Other Methodologies of Data Mining 603 Figure 13.5 Multidimensional data distribution analysis in StatSoft. Source: www.statsoft.com. data distributions in multidimensional space. Visual display can help give users a clear impression and overview of the data characteristics in a large data set. Data mining result visualization: Visualization of data mining results is the presen- tation of the results or knowledge obtained from data mining in visual forms. Such forms may include scatter plots and boxplots (Chapter 2), as well as decision trees, association rules, clusters, outliers, and generalized rules. For example, scatter plots are shown in Figure 13.6 from SAS Enterprise Miner. Figure 13.7, from MineSet, uses a plane associated with a set of pillars to describe a set of association rules mined from a database. Figure 13.8, also from MineSet, presents a decision tree. Figure 13.9, from IBM Intelligent Miner, presents a set of clusters and the properties associated with them. Data mining process visualization: This type of visualization presents the various processes of data mining in visual forms so that users can see how the data are extracted and from which database or data warehouse they are extracted, as well as how the selected data are cleaned, integrated, preprocessed, and mined. Moreover, it may also show which method is selected for data mining, where the results are stored, and how they may be viewed. Figure 13.10 shows a visual presentation of data mining processes by the Clementine data mining system. 604 Chapter 13 Data Mining Trends and Research Frontiers Figure 13.6 Visualization of data mining results in SAS Enterprise Miner. Interactive visual data mining: In (interactive) visual data mining, visualization tools can be used in the data mining process to help users make smart data mining decisions. For example, the data distribution in a set of attributes can be displayed using colored sectors (where the whole space is represented by a circle). This dis- play helps users determine which sector should ﬁrst be selected for classiﬁcation and where a good split point for this sector may be. An example of this is shown in Figure 13.11, which is the output of a perception-based classiﬁcation (PBC) system developed at the University of Munich. Audio data mining uses audio signals to indicate the patterns of data or the features of data mining results. Although visual data mining may disclose interesting patterns using graphical displays, it requires users to concentrate on watching patterns and iden- tifying interesting or novel features within them. This can sometimes be quite tiresome. If patterns can be transformed into sound and music, then instead of watching pic- tures, we can listen to pitchs, rhythm, tune, and melody to identify anything interesting or unusual. This may relieve some of the burden of visual concentration and be more 13.2 Other Methodologies of Data Mining 605 Figure 13.7 Visualization of association rules in MineSet. Figure 13.8 Visualization of a decision tree in MineSet. 606 Chapter 13 Data Mining Trends and Research Frontiers Figure 13.9 Visualization of cluster groupings in IBM Intelligent Miner. Figure 13.10 Visualization of data mining processes by Clementine. 13.3 Data Mining Applications 607 Figure 13.11 Perception-based classiﬁcation, an interactive visual mining approach. relaxing than visual mining. Therefore, audio data mining is an interesting complement to visual mining. 13.3 Data Mining Applications In this book, we have studied principles and methods for mining relational data, data warehouses, and complex data types. Because data mining is a relatively young discipline with wide and diverse applications, there is still a nontrivial gap between general princi- ples of data mining and application-speciﬁc, effective data mining tools. In this section, we examine several application domains, as listed in Figure 13.12. We discuss how customized data mining methods and tools should be developed for such applications. 13.3.1 Data Mining for Financial Data Analysis Most banks and ﬁnancial institutions offer a wide variety of banking, investment, and credit services (the latter include business, mortgage, and automobile loans and credit cards). Some also offer insurance and stock investment services. 608 Chapter 13 Data Mining Trends and Research Frontiers Financial Data Analysis Intrusion Detection and Prevention Recommender Systems Data Mining Applications Science and Engineering Retail and Telecommunication Industries Figure 13.12 Common data mining application domains. Financial data collected in the banking and ﬁnancial industry are often relatively complete, reliable, and of high quality, which facilitates systematic data analysis and data mining. Here we present a few typical cases. Design and construction of data warehouses for multidimensional data analysis and data mining: Like many other applications, data warehouses need to be con- structed for banking and ﬁnancial data. Multidimensional data analysis methods should be used to analyze the general properties of such data. For example, a com- pany’s ﬁnancial ofﬁcer may want to view the debt and revenue changes by month, region, and sector, and other factors, along with maximum, minimum, total, aver- age, trend, deviation, and other statistical information. Data warehouses, data cubes (including advanced data cube concepts such as multifeature, discovery-driven, regression, and prediction data cubes), characterization and class comparisons, clus- tering, and outlier analysis will all play important roles in ﬁnancial data analysis and mining. Loan payment prediction and customer credit policy analysis: Loan payment pre- diction and customer credit analysis are critical to the business of a bank. Many factors can strongly or weakly inﬂuence loan payment performance and customer credit rating. Data mining methods, such as attribute selection and attribute rele- vance ranking, may help identify important factors and eliminate irrelevant ones. For example, factors related to the risk of loan payments include loan-to-value ratio, term of the loan, debt ratio (total amount of monthly debt versus total monthly income), payment-to-income ratio, customer income level, education level, resi- dence region, and credit history. Analysis of the customer payment history may ﬁnd that, say, payment-to-income ratio is a dominant factor, while education level and debt ratio are not. The bank may then decide to adjust its loan-granting policy so 13.3 Data Mining Applications 609 as to grant loans to those customers whose applications were previously denied but whose proﬁles show relatively low risks according to the critical factor analysis. Classiﬁcation and clustering of customers for targeted marketing: Classiﬁcation and clustering methods can be used for customer group identiﬁcation and targeted marketing. For example, we can use classiﬁcation to identify the most crucial factors that may inﬂuence a customer’s decision regarding banking. Customers with similar behaviors regarding loan payments may be identiﬁed by multidimensional clustering techniques. These can help identify customer groups, associate a new customer with an appropriate customer group, and facilitate targeted marketing. Detection of money laundering and other ﬁnancial crimes: To detect money laun- dering and other ﬁnancial crimes, it is important to integrate information from multiple, heterogeneous databases (e.g., bank transaction databases and federal or state crime history databases), as long as they are potentially related to the study. Multiple data analysis tools can then be used to detect unusual patterns, such as large amounts of cash ﬂow at certain periods, by certain groups of customers. Useful tools include data visualization tools (to display transaction activities using graphs by time and by groups of customers), linkage and information network analysis tools (to identify links among different customers and activities), classiﬁcation tools (to ﬁl- ter unrelated attributes and rank the highly related ones), clustering tools (to group different cases), outlier analysis tools (to detect unusual amounts of fund transfers or other activities), and sequential pattern analysis tools (to characterize unusual access sequences). These tools may identify important relationships and patterns of activities and help investigators focus on suspicious cases for further detailed examination. 13.3.2 Data Mining for Retail and Telecommunication Industries The retail industry is a well-ﬁt application area for data mining, since it collects huge amounts of data on sales, customer shopping history, goods transportation, consump- tion, and service. The quantity of data collected continues to expand rapidly, especially due to the increasing availability, ease, and popularity of business conducted on the Web, or e-commerce. Today, most major chain stores also have web sites where customers can make purchases online. Some businesses, such as Amazon.com (www.amazon.com), exist solely online, without any brick-and-mortar (i.e., physical) store locations. Retail data provide a rich source for data mining. Retail data mining can help identify customer buying behaviors, discover customer shopping patterns and trends, improve the quality of customer service, achieve better customer retention and satisfaction, enhance goods consumption ratios, design more effective goods transportation and distribution policies, and reduce the cost of business. A few examples of data mining in the retail industry are outlined as follows: Design and construction of data warehouses: Because retail data cover a wide spec- trum (including sales, customers, employees, goods transportation, consumption, 610 Chapter 13 Data Mining Trends and Research Frontiers and services), there can be many ways to design a data warehouse for this industry. The levels of detail to include can vary substantially. The outcome of preliminary data mining exercises can be used to help guide the design and development of data warehouse structures. This involves deciding which dimensions and levels to include and what preprocessing to perform to facilitate effective data mining. Multidimensional analysis of sales, customers, products, time, and region: The retail industry requires timely information regarding customer needs, product sales, trends, and fashions, as well as the quality, cost, proﬁt, and service of commodities. It is therefore important to provide powerful multidimensional analysis and visual- ization tools, including the construction of sophisticated data cubes according to the needs of data analysis. The advanced data cube structures introduced in Chapter 5 are useful in retail data analysis because they facilitate analysis on multidimensional aggregates with complex conditions. Analysis of the effectiveness of sales campaigns: The retail industry conducts sales campaigns using advertisements, coupons, and various kinds of discounts and bonuses to promote products and attract customers. Careful analysis of the effec- tiveness of sales campaigns can help improve company proﬁts. Multidimensional analysis can be used for this purpose by comparing the amount of sales and the num- ber of transactions containing the sales items during the sales period versus those containing the same items before or after the sales campaign. Moreover, association analysis may disclose which items are likely to be purchased together with the items on sale, especially in comparison with the sales before or after the campaign. Customer retention—analysis of customer loyalty: We can use customer loyalty card information to register sequences of purchases of particular customers. Cus- tomer loyalty and purchase trends can be analyzed systematically. Goods purchased at different periods by the same customers can be grouped into sequences. Sequential pattern mining can then be used to investigate changes in customer consumption or loyalty and suggest adjustments on the pricing and variety of goods to help retain customers and attract new ones. Product recommendation and cross-referencing of items: By mining associations from sales records, we may discover that a customer who buys a digital camera is likely to buy another set of items. Such information can be used to form product recommendations. Collaborative recommender systems (Section 13.3.5) use data min- ing techniques to make personalized product recommendations during live customer transactions, based on the opinions of other customers. Product recommendations can also be advertised on sales receipts, in weekly ﬂyers, or on the Web to help improve customer service, aid customers in selecting items, and increase sales. Simi- larly, information, such as “hot items this week” or attractive deals, can be displayed together with the associative information to promote sales. Fraudulent analysis and the identiﬁcation of unusual patterns: Fraudulent activity costs the retail industry millions of dollars per year. It is important to (1) identify potentially fraudulent users and their atypical usage patterns; (2) detect attempts to gain fraudulent entry or unauthorized access to individual and organizational 13.3 Data Mining Applications 611 accounts; and (3) discover unusual patterns that may need special attention. Many of these patterns can be discovered by multidimensional analysis, cluster analysis, and outlier analysis. As another industry that handles huge amounts of data, the telecommunication industry has quickly evolved from offering local and long-distance telephone services to providing many other comprehensive communication services. These include cellu- lar phone, smart phone, Internet access, email, text messages, images, computer and web data transmissions, and other data trafﬁc. The integration of telecommunication, com- puter network, Internet, and numerous other means of communication and computing has been under way, changing the face of telecommunications and computing. This has created a great demand for data mining to help understand business dynamics, identify telecommunication patterns, catch fraudulent activities, make better use of resources, and improve service quality. Data mining tasks in telecommunications share many similarities with those in the retail industry. Common tasks include constructing large-scale data warehouses, performing multidimensional visualization, OLAP, and in-depth analysis of trends, customer patterns, and sequential patterns. Such tasks contribute to business improve- ments, cost reduction, customer retention, fraud analysis, and sharpening the edges of competition. There are many data mining tasks for which customized data mining tools for telecommunication have been ﬂourishing and are expected to play increasingly important roles in business. Data mining has been popularly used in many other industries, such as insurance, manufacturing, and health care, as well as for the analysis of governmental and insti- tutional administration data. Although each industry has its own characteristic data sets and application demands, they share many common principles and methodolo- gies. Therefore, through effective mining in one industry, we may gain experience and methodologies that can be transferred to other industrial applications. 13.3.3 Data Mining in Science and Engineering In the past, many scientiﬁc data analysis tasks tended to handle relatively small and homogeneous data sets. Such data were typically analyzed using a “formulate hypothesis, build model, and evaluate results” paradigm. In these cases, statistical techniques were typically employed for their analysis (see Section 13.2.1). Massive data collection and storage technologies have recently changed the landscape of scientiﬁc data analy- sis. Today, scientiﬁc data can be amassed at much higher speeds and lower costs. This has resulted in the accumulation of huge volumes of high-dimensional data, stream data, and heterogenous data, containing rich spatial and temporal informa- tion. Consequently, scientiﬁc applications are shifting from the “hypothesize-and-test” paradigm toward a “collect and store data, mine for new hypotheses, conﬁrm with data or experimentation” process. This shift brings about new challenges for data mining. Vast amounts of data have been collected from scientiﬁc domains (including geo- sciences, astronomy, meteorology, geology, and biological sciences) using sophisticated 612 Chapter 13 Data Mining Trends and Research Frontiers telescopes, multispectral high-resolution remote satellite sensors, global positioning sys- tems, and new generations of biological data collection and analysis technologies. Large data sets are also being generated due to fast numeric simulations in various ﬁelds such as climate and ecosystem modeling, chemical engineering, ﬂuid dynamics, and struc- tural mechanics. Here we look at some of the challenges brought about by emerging scientiﬁc applications of data mining. Data warehouses and data preprocessing: Data preprocessing and data warehouses are critical for information exchange and data mining. Creating a warehouse often requires ﬁnding means for resolving inconsistent or incompatible data collected in multiple environments and at different time periods. This requires reconcil- ing semantics, referencing systems, geometry, measurements, accuracy, and preci- sion. Methods are needed for integrating data from heterogeneous sources and for identifying events. For instance, consider climate and ecosystem data, which are spatial and tempo- ral and require cross-referencing geospatial data. A major problem in analyzing such data is that there are too many events in the spatial domain but too few in the tem- poral domain. For example, El Nino events occur only every four to seven years, and previous data on them might not have been collected as systematically as they are today. Methods are also needed for the efﬁcient computation of sophisticated spatial aggregates and the handling of spatial-related data streams. Mining complex data types: Scientiﬁc data sets are heterogeneous in nature. They typically involve semi-structured and unstructured data, such as multimedia data and georeferenced stream data, as well as data with sophisticated, deeply hidden semantics (e.g., genomic and proteomic data). Robust and dedicated analysis meth- ods are needed for handling spatiotemporal data, biological data, related concept hierarchies, and complex semantic relationships. For example, in bioinformatics, a research problem is to identify regulatory inﬂuences on genes. Gene regulation refers to how genes in a cell are switched on (or off) to determine the cell’s func- tions. Different biological processes involve different sets of genes acting together in precisely regulated patterns. Thus, to understand a biological process we need to identify the participating genes and their regulators. This requires the development of sophisticated data mining methods to analyze large biological data sets for clues about regulatory inﬂuences on speciﬁc genes, by ﬁnding DNA segments (“regulatory sequences”) mediating such inﬂuence. Graph-based and network-based mining: It is often difﬁcult or impossible to model several physical phenomena and processes due to limitations of existing modeling approaches. Alternatively, labeled graphs and networks may be used to capture many of the spatial, topological, geometric, biological, and other relational characteristics present in scientiﬁc data sets. In graph or network modeling, each object to be mined is represented by a vertex in a graph, and edges between ver- tices represent relationships between objects. For example, graphs can be used to model chemical structures, biological pathways, and data generated by numeric 13.3 Data Mining Applications 613 simulations such as ﬂuid-ﬂow simulations. The success of graph or network mod- eling, however, depends on improvements in the scalability and efﬁciency of many graph-based data mining tasks such as classiﬁcation, frequent pattern mining, and clustering. Visualization tools and domain-speciﬁc knowledge: High-level graphical user interfaces and visualization tools are required for scientiﬁc data mining systems. These should be integrated with existing domain-speciﬁc data and information sys- tems to guide researchers and general users in searching for patterns, interpreting and visualizing discovered patterns, and using discovered knowledge in their decision making. Data mining in engineering shares many similarities with data mining in science. Both practices often collect massive amounts of data, and require data preprocessing, data warehousing, and scalable mining of complex types of data. Both typically use visualization and make good use of graphs and networks. Moreover, many engineer- ing processes need real-time responses, and so mining data streams in real time often becomes a critical component. Massive amounts of human communication data pour into our daily life. Such com- munication exists in many forms, including news, blogs, articles, web pages, online discussions, product reviews, twitters, messages, advertisements, and communications, both on the Web and in various kinds of social networks. Hence, data mining in social science and social studies has become increasingly popular. Moreover, user or reader feedback regarding products, speeches, and articles can be analyzed to deduce general opinions and sentiments on the views of those in society. The analysis results can be used to predict trends, improve work, and help in decision making. Computer science generates unique kinds of data. For example, computer programs can be long, and their execution often generates huge-size traces. Computer networks can have complex structures and the network ﬂows can be dynamic and massive. Sensor networks may generate large amounts of data with varied reliability. Computer systems and databases can suffer from various kinds of attacks, and their system/data accessing may raise security and privacy concerns. These unique kinds of data provide fertile land for data mining. Data mining in computer science can be used to help monitor system status, improve system performance, isolate software bugs, detect software plagiarism, analyze computer system faults, uncover network intrusions, and recognize system malfunc- tions. Data mining for software and system engineering can operate on static or dynamic (i.e., stream-based) data, depending on whether the system dumps traces beforehand for postanalysis or if it must react in real time to handle online data. Various methods have been developed in this domain, which integrate and extend methods from machine learning, data mining, software/system engineering, pattern recognition, and statistics. Data mining in computer science is an active and rich domain for data miners because of its unique challenges. It requires the further development of sophisticated, scalable, and real-time data mining and software/system engineering methods. 614 Chapter 13 Data Mining Trends and Research Frontiers 13.3.4 Data Mining for Intrusion Detection and Prevention The security of our computer systems and data is at continual risk. The extensive growth of the Internet and the increasing availability of tools and tricks for intruding and attacking networks have prompted intrusion detection and prevention to become a critical component of networked systems. An intrusion can be deﬁned as any set of actions that threaten the integrity, conﬁdentiality, or availability of a network resource (e.g., user accounts, ﬁle systems, system kernels, and so on). Intrusion detection sys- tems and intrusion prevention systems both monitor network trafﬁc and/or system executions for malicious activities. However, the former produces reports whereas the latter is placed in-line and is able to actively prevent/block intrusions that are detected. The main functions of an intrusion prevention system are to identify malicious activ- ity, log information about said activity, attempt to block/stop activity, and report activity. The majority of intrusion detection and prevention systems use either signature- based detection or anomaly-based detection. Signature-based detection: This method of detection utilizes signatures, which are attack patterns that are preconﬁgured and predetermined by domain experts. A signature-based intrusion prevention system monitors the network trafﬁc for matches to these signatures. Once a match is found, the intrusion detection sys- tem will report the anomaly and an intrusion prevention system will take additional appropriate actions. Note that since the systems are usually quite dynamic, the sig- natures need to be updated laboriously whenever new software versions arrive or changes in network conﬁguration or other situations occur. Another drawback is that such a detection mechanism can only identify cases that match the signatures. That is, it is unable to detect new or previously unknown intrusion tricks. Anomaly-based detection: This method builds models of normal network behavior (called proﬁles) that are then used to detect new patterns that signiﬁcantly deviate from the proﬁles. Such deviations may represent actual intrusions or simply be new behaviors that need to be added to the proﬁles. The main advantage of anomaly detection is that it may detect novel intrusions that have not yet been observed. Typ- ically, a human analyst must sort through the deviations to ascertain which represent real intrusions. A limiting factor of anomaly detection is the high percentage of false positives. New patterns of intrusion can be added to the set of signatures to enhance signature-based detection. Data mining methods can help an intrusion detection and prevention system to enhance its performance in various ways as follows. New data mining algorithms for intrusion detection: Data mining algorithms can be used for both signature-based and anomaly-based detection. In signature-based detection, training data are labeled as either “normal” or “intrusion.” A classi- ﬁer can then be derived to detect known intrusions. Research in this area has 13.3 Data Mining Applications 615 included the application of classiﬁcation algorithms, association rule mining, and cost-sensitive modeling. Anomaly-based detection builds models of normal beha- vior and automatically detects signiﬁcant deviations from it. Methods include the application of clustering, outlier analysis, and classiﬁcation algorithms and statisti- cal approaches. The techniques used must be efﬁcient and scalable, and capable of handling network data of high volume, dimensionality, and heterogeneity. Association, correlation, and discriminative pattern analyses help select and build discriminative classiﬁers: Association, correlation, and discriminative pattern min- ing can be applied to ﬁnd relationships between system attributes describing the network data. Such information can provide insight regarding the selection of useful attributes for intrusion detection. New attributes derived from aggregated data may also be helpful such as summary counts of trafﬁc matching a particular pattern. Analysis of stream data: Due to the transient and dynamic nature of intrusions and malicious attacks, it is crucial to perform intrusion detection in the data stream environment. Moreover, an event may be normal on its own, but considered mali- cious if viewed as part of a sequence of events. Thus, it is necessary to study what sequences of events are frequently encountered together, ﬁnd sequential patterns, and identify outliers. Other data mining methods for ﬁnding evolving clusters and build- ing dynamic classiﬁcation models in data streams are also necessary for real-time intrusion detection. Distributed data mining: Intrusions can be launched from several different loca- tions and targeted to many different destinations. Distributed data mining methods may be used to analyze network data from several network locations to detect these distributed attacks. Visualization and querying tools: Visualization tools should be available for view- ing any anomalous patterns detected. Such tools may include features for viewing associations, discriminative patterns, clusters, and outliers. Intrusion detection sys- tems should also have a graphical user interface that allows security analysts to pose queries regarding the network data or intrusion detection results. In summary, computer systems are at continual risk of breaks in security. Data mining technology can be used to develop strong intrusion detection and prevention systems, which may employ signature-based or anomaly-based detection. 13.3.5 Data Mining and Recommender Systems Today’s consumers are faced with millions of goods and services when shopping online. Recommender systems help consumers by making product recommendations that are likely to be of interest to the user such as books, CDs, movies, restaurants, online news articles, and other services. Recommender systems may use either a content- based approach, a collaborative approach, or a hybrid approach that combines both content-based and collaborative methods. 616 Chapter 13 Data Mining Trends and Research Frontiers The content-based approach recommends items that are similar to items the user preferred or queried in the past. It relies on product features and textual item descriptions. The collaborative approach (or collaborative ﬁltering approach) may consider a user’s social environment. It recommends items based on the opinions of other customers who have similar tastes or preferences as the user. Recommender sys- tems use a broad range of techniques from information retrieval, statistics, machine learning, and data mining to search for similarities among items and customer prefer- ences. Consider Example 13.1. Example 13.1 Scenarios of using a recommender system. Suppose that you visit the web site of an online bookstore (e.g., Amazon) with the intention of purchasing a book that you have been wanting to read. You type in the name of the book. This is not the ﬁrst time you have visited the web site. You have browsed through it before and even made purchases from it last Christmas. The web store remembers your previous visits, having stored click stream information and information regarding your past purchases. The system displays the description and price of the book you have just speciﬁed. It compares your interests with other customers having similar interests and recommends additional book titles, saying “Customers who bought the book you have speciﬁed also bought these other titles as well.” From surveying the list, you see another title that sparks your interest and decide to purchase that one as well. Now suppose you go to another online store with the intention of purchasing a digital camera. The system suggests additional items to consider based on previously mined sequential patterns, such as “Customers who buy this kind of digital camera are likely to buy a particular brand of printer, memory card, or photo editing software within three months.” You decide to buy just the camera, without any additional items. A week later, you receive coupons from the store regarding the additional items. An advantage of recommender systems is that they provide personalization for cus- tomers of e-commerce, promoting one-to-one marketing. Amazon, a pioneer in the use of collaborative recommender systems, offers “a personalized store for every customer” as part of their marketing strategy. Personalization can beneﬁt both consumers and the company involved. By having more accurate models of their customers, companies gain a better understanding of customer needs. Serving these needs can result in greater suc- cess regarding cross-selling of related products, upselling, product afﬁnities, one-to-one promotions, larger baskets, and customer retention. The recommendation problem considers a set, C, of users and a set, S, of items. Let u be a utility function that measures the usefulness of an item, s, to a user, c. The utility is commonly represented by a rating and is initially deﬁned only for items previously rated by users. For example, when joining a movie recommendation system, users are typically asked to rate several movies. The space C × S of all possible users and items is huge. The recommendation system should be able to extrapolate from known to unknown ratings so as to predict item–user combinations. Items with the highest predicted rating/utility for a user are recommended to that user. 13.3 Data Mining Applications 617 “How is the utility of an item estimated for a user?” In content-based methods, it is estimated based on the utilities assigned by the same user to other items that are similar. Many such systems focus on recommending items containing textual infor- mation, such as web sites, articles, and news messages. They look for commonalities among items. For movies, they may look for similar genres, directors, or actors. For articles, they may look for similar terms. Content-based methods are rooted in infor- mation theory. They make use of keywords (describing the items) and user proﬁles that contain information about users’ tastes and needs. Such proﬁles may be obtained explicitly (e.g., through questionnaires) or learned from users’ transactional behavior over time. A collaborative recommender system tries to predict the utility of items for a user, u, based on items previously rated by other users who are similar to u. For example, when recommending books, a collaborative recommender system tries to ﬁnd other users who have a history of agreeing with u (e.g., they tend to buy similar books, or give similar ratings for books). Collaborative recommender systems can be either memory (or heuristic) based or model based. Memory-based methods essentially use heuristics to make rating predictions based on the entire collection of items previously rated by users. That is, the unknown rating of an item–user combination can be estimated as an aggregate of ratings of the most similar users for the same item. Typically, a k-nearest-neighbor approach is used, that is, we ﬁnd the k other users (or neighbors) that are most similar to our target user, u. Vari- ous approaches can be used to compute the similarity between users. The most popular approaches use either Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient (Section 3.3.2) or cosine simi- larity (Section 2.4.7). A weighted aggregate can be used, which adjusts for the fact that different users may use the rating scale differently. Model-based collaborative recom- mender systems use a collection of ratings to learn a model, which is then used to make rating predictions. For example, probabilistic models, clustering (which ﬁnds clusters of like-minded customers), Bayesian networks, and other machine learning techniques have been used. Recommender systems face major challenges such as scalability and ensuring qual- ity recommendations to the consumer. For example, regarding scalability, collaborative recommender systems must be able to search through millions of potential neighbors in real time. If the site is using browsing patterns as indications of product prefer- ence, it may have thousands of data points for some of its customers. Ensuring quality recommendations is essential to gain consumers’ trust. If consumers follow a system recommendation but then do not end up liking the product, they are less likely to use the recommender system again. As with classiﬁcation systems, recommender systems can make two types of errors: false negatives and false positives. Here, false negatives are products that the system fails to recommend, although the consumer would like them. False positives are prod- ucts that are recommended, but which the consumer does not like. False positives are less desirable because they can annoy or anger consumers. Content-based recom- mender systems are limited by the features used to describe the items they recommend. 618 Chapter 13 Data Mining Trends and Research Frontiers Another challenge for both content-based and collaborative recommender systems is how to deal with new users for which a buying history is not yet available. Hybrid approaches integrate both content-based and collaborative methods to achieve further improved recommendations. The Netﬂix Prize was an open competi- tion held by an online DVD-rental service, with a payout of $1,000,000 for the best recommender algorithm to predict user ratings for ﬁlms, based on previous ratings. The competition and other studies have shown that the predictive accuracy of a rec- ommender system can be substantially improved when blending multiple predictors, especially by using an ensemble of many substantially different methods, rather than reﬁning a single technique. Collaborative recommender systems are a form of intelligent query answering, which consists of analyzing the intent of a query and providing generalized, neighbor- hood, or associated information relevant to the query. For example, rather than simply returning the book description and price in response to a customer’s query, returning additional information that is related to the query but that was not explicitly asked for (e.g., book evaluation comments, recommendations of other books, or sales statistics) provides an intelligent answer to the same query. 13.4 Data Mining and Society For most of us, data mining is part of our daily lives, although we may often be unaware of its presence. Section 13.4.1 looks at several examples of “ubiquitous and invisible” data mining, affecting everyday things from the products stocked at our local super- market, to the ads we see while surﬁng the Internet, to crime prevention. Data mining can offer the individual many beneﬁts by improving customer service and satisfaction as well as lifestyle, in general. However, it also has serious implications regarding one’s right to privacy and data security. These issues are the topic of Section 13.4.2. 13.4.1 Ubiquitous and Invisible Data Mining Data mining is present in many aspects of our daily lives, whether we realize it or not. It affects how we shop, work, and search for information, and can even inﬂuence our leisure time, health, and well-being. In this section, we look at examples of such ubiq- uitous (or ever-present) data mining. Several of these examples also represent invisible data mining, in which “smart” software, such as search engines, customer-adaptive web services (e.g., using recommender algorithms), “intelligent” database systems, email managers, ticket masters, and so on, incorporates data mining into its functional components, often unbeknownst to the user. From grocery stores that print personalized coupons on customer receipts to online stores that recommend additional items based on customer interests, data mining has innovatively inﬂuenced what we buy, the way we shop, and our experience while shop- ping. One example is Wal-Mart, which has hundreds of millions of customers visiting its tens of thousands of stores every week. Wal-Mart allows suppliers to access data on 13.4 Data Mining and Society 619 their products and perform analyses using data mining software. This allows suppliers to identify customer buying patterns at different stores, control inventory and prod- uct placement, and identify new merchandizing opportunities. All of these affect which items (and how many) end up on the stores’ shelves—something to think about the next time you wander through the aisles at Wal-Mart. Data mining has shaped the online shopping experience. Many shoppers routinely turn to online stores to purchase books, music, movies, and toys. Recommender sys- tems, discussed in Section 13.3.5, offer personalized product recommendations based on the opinions of other customers. Amazon.com was at the forefront of using such a personalized, data mining–based approach as a marketing strategy. It has observed that in traditional brick-and-mortar stores, the hardest part is getting the customer into the store. Once the customer is there, he or she is likely to buy something, since the cost of going to another store is high. Therefore, the marketing for brick-and-mortar stores tends to emphasize drawing customers in, rather than the actual in-store customer expe- rience. This is in contrast to online stores, where customers can “walk out” and enter another online store with just a click of the mouse. Amazon.com capitalized on this dif- ference, offering a “personalized store for every customer.” They use several data mining techniques to identify customer’s likes and make reliable recommendations. While we are on the topic of shopping, suppose you have been doing a lot of buying with your credit cards. Nowadays, it is not unusual to receive a phone call from one’s credit card company regarding suspicious or unusual patterns of spending. Credit card companies use data mining to detect fraudulent usage, saving billions of dollars a year. Many companies increasingly use data mining for customer relationship man- agement (CRM), which helps provide more customized, personal service addressing individual customer’s needs, in lieu of mass marketing. By studying browsing and pur- chasing patterns on web stores, companies can tailor advertisements and promotions to customer proﬁles, so that customers are less likely to be annoyed with unwanted mass mailings or junk mail. These actions can result in substantial cost savings for companies. The customers further beneﬁt in that they are more likely to be notiﬁed of offers that are actually of interest, resulting in less waste of personal time and greater satisfaction. Data mining has greatly inﬂuenced the ways in which people use computers, search for information, and work. Once you get on the Internet, for example, you decide to check your email. Unbeknownst to you, several annoying emails have already been deleted, thanks to a spam ﬁlter that uses classiﬁcation algorithms to recognize spam. After processing your email, you go to Google (www.google.com), which provides access to information from billions of web pages indexed on its server. Google is one of the most popular and widely used Internet search engines. Using Google to search for information has become a way of life for many people. Google is so popular that it has even become a new verb in the English language, meaning “to search for (something) on the Internet using the Google search engine or, by extension, any comprehensive search engine.”1 You decide to type in some keywords 1http://open-dictionary.com. 620 Chapter 13 Data Mining Trends and Research Frontiers for a topic of interest. Google returns a list of web sites on your topic, mined, indexed, and organized by a set of data mining algorithms including PageRank. Moreover, if you type “Boston New York,” Google will show you bus and train schedules from Boston to New York; however, a minor change to “Boston Paris” will lead to ﬂight schedules from Boston to Paris. Such smart offerings of information or services are likely based on the frequent patterns mined from the click streams of many previous queries. While you are viewing the results of your Google query, various ads pop up relating to your query. Google’s strategy of tailoring advertising to match the user’s interests is one of the typical services being explored by every Internet search provider. This also makes you happier, because you are less likely to be pestered with irrelevant ads. Data mining is omnipresent, as can be seen from these daily-encountered examples. We could go on and on with such scenarios. In many cases, data mining is invisible, as users may be unaware that they are examining results returned by data mining or that their clicks are actually fed as new data into some data mining functions. For data mining to become further improved and accepted as a technology, continuing research and development are needed in the many areas mentioned as challenges throughout this book. These include efﬁciency and scalability, increased user interaction, incorporation of background knowledge and visualization techniques, effective methods for ﬁnding interesting patterns, improved handling of complex data types and stream data, real- time data mining, web mining, and so on. In addition, the integration of data mining into existing business and scientiﬁc technologies, to provide domain-speciﬁc data min- ing tools, will further contribute to the advancement of the technology. The success of data mining solutions tailored for e-commerce applications, as opposed to generic data mining systems, is an example. 13.4.2 Privacy, Security, and Social Impacts of Data Mining With more and more information accessible in electronic forms and available on the Web, and with increasingly powerful data mining tools being developed and put into use, there are increasing concerns that data mining may pose a threat to our privacy and data security. However, it is important to note that many data mining applications do not even touch personal data. Prominent examples include applications involving natural resources, the prediction of ﬂoods and droughts, meteorology, astronomy, geog- raphy, geology, biology, and other scientiﬁc and engineering data. Furthermore, most studies in data mining research focus on the development of scalable algorithms and do not involve personal data. The focus of data mining technology is on the discovery of general or statistically signiﬁcant patterns, not on speciﬁc information regarding individuals. In this sense, we believe that the real privacy concerns are with unconstrained access to individual records, especially access to privacy-sensitive information such as credit card transaction records, health-care records, personal ﬁnancial records, biological traits, criminal/justice investigations, and ethnicity. For the data mining applications that do involve personal data, in many cases, simple methods such as removing sensitive IDs from data may protect the privacy of most individuals. Nevertheless, privacy concerns exist wherever 13.4 Data Mining and Society 621 personally identiﬁable information is collected and stored in digital form, and data mining programs are able to access such data, even during data preparation. Improper or nonexistent disclosure control can be the root cause of privacy issues. To handle such concerns, numerous data security-enhancing techniques have been developed. In addition, there has been a great deal of recent effort on developing privacy- preserving data mining methods. In this section, we look at some of the advances in protecting privacy and data security in data mining. “What can we do to secure the privacy of individuals while collecting and mining data?” Many data security–enhancing techniques have been developed to help protect data. Databases can employ a multilevel security model to classify and restrict data according to various security levels, with users permitted access to only their authorized level. It has been shown, however, that users executing speciﬁc queries at their authorized security level can still infer more sensitive information, and that a similar possibility can occur through data mining. Encryption is another technique in which individual data items may be encoded. This may involve blind signatures (which build on public key encryp- tion), biometric encryption (e.g., where the image of a person’s iris or ﬁngerprint is used to encode his or her personal information), and anonymous databases (which permit the consolidation of various databases but limit access to personal information only to those who need to know; personal information is encrypted and stored at different locations). Intrusion detection is another active area of research that helps protect the privacy of personal data. Privacy-preserving data mining is an area of data mining research in response to privacy protection in data mining. It is also known as privacy-enhanced or privacy- sensitive data mining. It deals with obtaining valid data mining results without disclosing the underlying sensitive data values. Most privacy-preserving data mining methods use some form of transformation on the data to perform privacy preservation. Typically, such methods reduce the granularity of representation to preserve privacy. For example, they may generalize the data from individual customers to customer groups. This reduction in granularity causes loss of information and possibly of the usefulness of the data mining results. This is the natural trade-off between information loss and privacy. Privacy-preserving data mining methods can be classiﬁed into the following categories. Randomization methods: These methods add noise to the data to mask some attribute values of records. The noise added should be sufﬁciently large so that individual record values, especially sensitive ones, cannot be recovered. However, it should be added skillfully so that the ﬁnal results of data mining are basically preserved. Techniques are designed to derive aggregate distributions from the per- turbed data. Subsequently, data mining techniques can be developed to work with these aggregate distributions. The k-anonymity and l-diversity methods: Both of these methods alter individual records so that they cannot be uniquely identiﬁed. In the k-anonymity method, the granularity of data representation is reduced sufﬁciently so that any given record maps onto at least k other records in the data. It uses techniques like generalization and suppression. The k-anonymity method is weak in that, if there is a homogeneity 622 Chapter 13 Data Mining Trends and Research Frontiers of sensitive values within a group, then those values may be inferred for the altered records. The l-diversity model was designed to handle this weakness by enforcing intragroup diversity of sensitive values to ensure anonymization. The goal is to make it sufﬁciently difﬁcult for adversaries to use combinations of record attributes to exactly identify individual records. Distributed privacy preservation: Large data sets could be partitioned and dis- tributed either horizontally (i.e., the data sets are partitioned into different subsets of records and distributed across multiple sites) or vertically (i.e., the data sets are partitioned and distributed by their attributes), or even in a combination of both. While the individual sites may not want to share their entire data sets, they may consent to limited information sharing with the use of a variety of protocols. The overall effect of such methods is to maintain privacy for each individual object, while deriving aggregate results over all of the data. Downgrading the effectiveness of data mining results: In many cases, even though the data may not be available, the output of data mining (e.g, association rules and classiﬁcation models) may result in violations of privacy. The solution could be to downgradetheeffectivenessofdataminingbyeithermodifyingdataorminingresults, such as hiding some association rules or slightly distorting some classiﬁcation models. Recently, researchers proposed new ideas in privacy-preserving data mining such as the notion of differential privacy. The general idea is that, for any two data sets that are close to one another (i.e., that differ only on a tiny data set such as a single ele- ment), a given differentially private algorithm will behave approximately the same on both data sets. This deﬁnition gives a strong guarantee that the presence or absence of a tiny data set (e.g., representing an individual) will not affect the ﬁnal output of the query signiﬁcantly. Based on this notion, a set of differential privacy-preserving data mining algorithms have been developed. Research in this direction is ongoing. We expect more powerful privacy-preserving data publishing and data mining algorithms in the near future. Like any other technology, data mining can be misused. However, we must not lose sight of all the beneﬁts that data mining research can bring, ranging from insights gained from medical and scientiﬁc applications to increased customer satisfaction by helping companies better suit their clients’ needs. We expect that computer scientists, policy experts, and counterterrorism experts will continue to work with social scientists, lawyers, companies, and consumers to take responsibility in building solutions to ensure data privacy protection and security. In this way, we may continue to reap the beneﬁts of data mining in terms of time and money savings and the discovery of new knowledge. 13.5 Data Mining Trends The diversity of data, data mining tasks, and data mining approaches poses many chal- lenging research issues in data mining. The development of efﬁcient and effective data 13.5 Data Mining Trends 623 mining methods, systems and services, and interactive and integrated data mining envi- ronments is a key area of study. The use of data mining techniques to solve large or sophisticated application problems is an important task for data mining researchers and data mining system and application developers. This section describes some of the trends in data mining that reﬂect the pursuit of these challenges. Application exploration: Early data mining applications put a lot of effort into help- ing businesses gain a competitive edge. The exploration of data mining for businesses continues to expand as e-commerce and e-marketing have become mainstream in the retail industry. Data mining is increasingly used for the exploration of applications in other areas such as web and text analysis, ﬁnancial analysis, industry, govern- ment, biomedicine, and science. Emerging application areas include data mining for counterterrorism and mobile (wireless) data mining. Because generic data mining systems may have limitations in dealing with application-speciﬁc problems, we may see a trend toward the development of more application-speciﬁc data mining sys- tems and tools, as well as invisible data mining functions embedded in various kinds of services. Scalable and interactive data mining methods: In contrast with traditional data analysis methods, data mining must be able to handle huge amounts of data efﬁ- ciently and, if possible, interactively. Because the amount of data being collected continues to increase rapidly, scalable algorithms for individual and integrated data mining functions become essential. One important direction toward improv- ing the overall efﬁciency of the mining process while increasing user interaction is constraint-based mining. This provides users with added control by allowing the speciﬁcation and use of constraints to guide data mining systems in their search for interesting patterns and knowledge. Integration of data mining with search engines, database systems, data warehouse systems, and cloud computing systems: Search engines, database systems, data warehouse systems, and cloud computing systems are mainstream information pro- cessing and computing systems. It is important to ensure that data mining serves as an essential data analysis component that can be smoothly integrated into such an information processing environment. A data mining subsystem/service should be tightly coupled with such systems as a seamless, uniﬁed framework or as an invisible function. This will ensure data availability, data mining portability, scalability, high performance, and an integrated information processing environment for multi- dimensional data analysis and exploration. Mining social and information networks: Mining social and information net- works and link analysis are critical tasks because such networks are ubiquitous and complex. The development of scalable and effective knowledge discovery meth- ods and applications for large numbers of network data is essential, as outlined in Section 13.1.2. Mining spatiotemporal, moving-objects, and cyber-physical systems: Cyber- physical systems as well as spatiotemporal data are mounting rapidly due to the 624 Chapter 13 Data Mining Trends and Research Frontiers popular use of cellular phones, GPS, sensors, and other wireless equipment. As outlined in Section 13.1.3, there are many challenging research issues realizing real-time and effective knowledge discovery with such data. Mining multimedia, text, and web data: As outlined in Section 13.1.3, mining such kinds of data is a recent focus in data mining research. Great progress has been made, yet there are still many open issues to be solved. Mining biological and biomedical data: The unique combination of complexity, richness, size, and importance of biological and biomedical data warrants spe- cial attention in data mining. Mining DNA and protein sequences, mining high- dimensional microarray data, and biological pathway and network analysis are just a few topics in this ﬁeld. Other areas of biological data mining research include mining biomedical literature, link analysis across heterogeneous biological data, and information integration of biological data by data mining. Data mining with software engineering and system engineering: Software pro- grams and large computer systems have become increasingly bulky in size sophisticated in complexity, and tend to originate from the integration of multiple components developed by different implementation teams. This trend has made it an increasingly challenging task to ensure software robustness and reliability. The analysis of the executions of a buggy software program is essentially a data mining process—tracing the data generated during program executions may disclose impor- tant patterns and outliers that could lead to the eventual automated discovery of software bugs. We expect that the further development of data mining methodolo- gies for software/system debugging will enhance software robustness and bring new vigor to software/system engineering. Visual and audio data mining: Visual and audio data mining is an effective way to integrate with humans’ visual and audio systems and discover knowledge from huge amounts of data. A systematic development of such techniques will facilitate the promotion of human participation for effective and efﬁcient data analysis. Distributed data mining and real-time data stream mining: Traditional data min- ing methods, designed to work at a centralized location, do not work well in many of the distributed computing environments present today (e.g., the Inter- net, intranets, local area networks, high-speed wireless networks, sensor networks, and cloud computing). Advances in distributed data mining methods are expected. Moreover, many applications involving stream data (e.g., e-commerce, Web mining, stock analysis, intrusion detection, mobile data mining, and data mining for coun- terterrorism) require dynamic data mining models to be built in real time. Additional research is needed in this direction. Privacy protection and information security in data mining: An abundance of personal or conﬁdential information available in electronic forms, coupled with increasingly powerful data mining tools, poses a threat to data privacy and security. Growing interest in data mining for counterterrorism also adds to the concern. 13.6 Summary 625 Further development of privacy-preserving data mining methods is foreseen. The