recommender systems, etc. Future Generation of Information Systems (Present to future) Figure 1.1 The evolution of database system technology. several critical functionalities (Figure 1.1): data collection and database creation, data management (including data storage and retrieval and database transaction processing), and advanced data analysis (involving data warehousing and data mining). The early development of data collection and database creation mechanisms served as a prerequi- site for the later development of effective mechanisms for data storage and retrieval, as well as query and transaction processing. Nowadays numerous database systems offer query and transaction processing as common practice. Advanced data analysis has naturally become the next step. 4 Chapter 1 Introduction Since the 1960s, database and information technology has evolved systematically from primitive ﬁle processing systems to sophisticated and powerful database systems. The research and development in database systems since the 1970s progressed from early hierarchical and network database systems to relational database systems (where data are stored in relational table structures; see Section 1.3.1), data modeling tools, and indexing and accessing methods. In addition, users gained convenient and ﬂexible data access through query languages, user interfaces, query optimization, and transac- tion management. Efﬁcient methods for online transaction processing (OLTP), where a query is viewed as a read-only transaction, contributed substantially to the evolution and wide acceptance of relational technology as a major tool for efﬁcient storage, retrieval, and management of large amounts of data. After the establishment of database management systems, database technology moved toward the development of advanced database systems, data warehousing, and data mining for advanced data analysis and web-based databases. Advanced database systems, for example, resulted from an upsurge of research from the mid-1980s onward. These systems incorporate new and powerful data models such as extended-relational, object-oriented, object-relational, and deductive models. Application-oriented database systems have ﬂourished, including spatial, temporal, multimedia, active, stream and sensor, scientiﬁc and engineering databases, knowledge bases, and ofﬁce information bases. Issues related to the distribution, diversiﬁcation, and sharing of data have been studied extensively. Advanced data analysis sprang up from the late 1980s onward. The steady and dazzling progress of computer hardware technology in the past three decades led to large supplies of powerful and affordable computers, data collection equipment, and storage media. This technology provides a great boost to the database and information industry, and it enables a huge number of databases and information repositories to be available for transaction management, information retrieval, and data analysis. Data can now be stored in many different kinds of databases and information repositories. One emerging data repository architecture is the data warehouse (Section 1.3.2). This is a repository of multiple heterogeneous data sources organized under a uni- ﬁed schema at a single site to facilitate management decision making. Data warehouse technology includes data cleaning, data integration, and online analytical processing (OLAP)—that is, analysis techniques with functionalities such as summarization, con- solidation, and aggregation, as well as the ability to view information from different angles. Although OLAP tools support multidimensional analysis and decision making, additional data analysis tools are required for in-depth analysis—for example, data min- ing tools that provide data classiﬁcation, clustering, outlier/anomaly detection, and the characterization of changes in data over time. Huge volumes of data have been accumulated beyond databases and data ware- houses. During the 1990s, the World Wide Web and web-based databases (e.g., XML databases) began to appear. Internet-based global information bases, such as the WWW and various kinds of interconnected, heterogeneous databases, have emerged and play a vital role in the information industry. The effective and efﬁcient analysis of data from such different forms of data by integration of information retrieval, data mining, and information network analysis technologies is a challenging task. 1.2 What Is Data Mining? 5 How can I analyze these data? Figure 1.2 The world is data rich but information poor. In summary, the abundance of data, coupled with the need for powerful data analysis tools, has been described as a data rich but information poor situation (Figure 1.2). The fast-growing, tremendous amount of data, collected and stored in large and numerous data repositories, has far exceeded our human ability for comprehension without power- ful tools. As a result, data collected in large data repositories become “data tombs”—data archives that are seldom visited. Consequently, important decisions are often made based not on the information-rich data stored in data repositories but rather on a deci- sion maker’s intuition, simply because the decision maker does not have the tools to extract the valuable knowledge embedded in the vast amounts of data. Efforts have been made to develop expert system and knowledge-based technologies, which typically rely on users or domain experts to manually input knowledge into knowledge bases. Unfortunately, however, the manual knowledge input procedure is prone to biases and errors and is extremely costly and time consuming. The widening gap between data and information calls for the systematic development of data mining tools that can turn data tombs into “golden nuggets” of knowledge. 1.2 What Is Data Mining? It is no surprise that data mining, as a truly interdisciplinary subject, can be deﬁned in many different ways. Even the term data mining does not really present all the major components in the picture. To refer to the mining of gold from rocks or sand, we say gold mining instead of rock or sand mining. Analogously, data mining should have been more 6 Chapter 1 Introduction Knowledge Figure 1.3 Data mining—searching for knowledge (interesting patterns) in data. appropriately named “knowledge mining from data,” which is unfortunately somewhat long. However, the shorter term, knowledge mining may not reﬂect the emphasis on mining from large amounts of data. Nevertheless, mining is a vivid term characterizing the process that ﬁnds a small set of precious nuggets from a great deal of raw material (Figure 1.3). Thus, such a misnomer carrying both “data” and “mining” became a pop- ular choice. In addition, many other terms have a similar meaning to data mining—for example, knowledge mining from data, knowledge extraction, data/pattern analysis, data archaeology, and data dredging. Many people treat data mining as a synonym for another popularly used term, knowledge discovery from data, or KDD, while others view data mining as merely an essential step in the process of knowledge discovery. The knowledge discovery process is shown in Figure 1.4 as an iterative sequence of the following steps: 1. Data cleaning (to remove noise and inconsistent data) 2. Data integration (where multiple data sources may be combined)3 3A popular trend in the information industry is to perform data cleaning and data integration as a preprocessing step, where the resulting data are stored in a data warehouse. 1.2 What Is Data Mining? 7 Flat files Databases Data Warehouse Patterns Knowledge Cleaning and integration Selection and transformation Data mining Evaluation and presentation Figure 1.4 Data mining as a step in the process of knowledge discovery. 8 Chapter 1 Introduction 3. Data selection (where data relevant to the analysis task are retrieved from the database) 4. Data transformation (where data are transformed and consolidated into forms appropriate for mining by performing summary or aggregation operations)4 5. Data mining (an essential process where intelligent methods are applied to extract data patterns) 6. Pattern evaluation (to identify the truly interesting patterns representing knowledge based on interestingness measures—see Section 1.4.6) 7. Knowledge presentation (where visualization and knowledge representation tech- niques are used to present mined knowledge to users) Steps 1 through 4 are different forms of data preprocessing, where data are prepared for mining. The data mining step may interact with the user or a knowledge base. The interesting patterns are presented to the user and may be stored as new knowledge in the knowledge base. The preceding view shows data mining as one step in the knowledge discovery pro- cess, albeit an essential one because it uncovers hidden patterns for evaluation. However, in industry, in media, and in the research milieu, the term data mining is often used to refer to the entire knowledge discovery process (perhaps because the term is shorter than knowledge discovery from data). Therefore, we adopt a broad view of data min- ing functionality: Data mining is the process of discovering interesting patterns and knowledge from large amounts of data. The data sources can include databases, data warehouses, the Web, other information repositories, or data that are streamed into the system dynamically. 1.3 What Kinds of Data Can Be Mined? As a general technology, data mining can be applied to any kind of data as long as the data are meaningful for a target application. The most basic forms of data for mining applications are database data (Section 1.3.1), data warehouse data (Section 1.3.2), and transactional data (Section 1.3.3). The concepts and techniques presented in this book focus on such data. Data mining can also be applied to other forms of data (e.g., data streams, ordered/sequence data, graph or networked data, spatial data, text data, multimedia data, and the WWW). We present an overview of such data in Section 1.3.4. Techniques for mining of these kinds of data are brieﬂy introduced in Chapter 13. In- depth treatment is considered an advanced topic. Data mining will certainly continue to embrace new data types as they emerge. 4Sometimes data transformation and consolidation are performed before the data selection process, particularly in the case of data warehousing. Data reduction may also be performed to obtain a smaller representation of the original data without sacriﬁcing its integrity. 1.3 What Kinds of Data Can Be Mined? 9 1.3.1 Database Data A database system, also called a database management system (DBMS), consists of a collection of interrelated data, known as a database, and a set of software programs to manage and access the data. The software programs provide mechanisms for deﬁning database structures and data storage; for specifying and managing concurrent, shared, or distributed data access; and for ensuring consistency and security of the information stored despite system crashes or attempts at unauthorized access. A relational database is a collection of tables, each of which is assigned a unique name. Each table consists of a set of attributes (columns or ﬁelds) and usually stores a large set of tuples (records or rows). Each tuple in a relational table represents an object identiﬁed by a unique key and described by a set of attribute values. A semantic data model, such as an entity-relationship (ER) data model, is often constructed for relational databases. An ER data model represents the database as a set of entities and their relationships. Example 1.2 A relational database for AllElectronics. The ﬁctitious AllElectronics store is used to illustrate concepts throughout this book. The company is described by the following relation tables: customer, item, employee, and branch. The headers of the tables described here are shown in Figure 1.5. (A header is also called the schema of a relation.) The relation customer consists of a set of attributes describing the customer infor- mation, including a unique customer identity number (cust ID), customer name, address, age, occupation, annual income, credit information, and category. Similarly, each of the relations item, employee, and branch consists of a set of attri- butes describing the properties of these entities. Tables can also be used to represent the relationships between or among multiple entities. In our example, these include purchases (customer purchases items, creating a sales transaction handled by an employee), items sold (lists items sold in a given transaction), and works at (employee works at a branch of AllElectronics). customer (cust ID, name, address, age, occupation, annual income, credit information, category, ...) item (item ID, brand, category, type, price, place made, supplier, cost, ...) employee (empl ID, name, category, group, salary, commission, ...) branch (branch ID, name, address, ...) purchases (trans ID, cust ID, empl ID, date, time, method paid, amount) items sold (trans ID, item ID, qty) works at (empl ID, branch ID) Figure 1.5 Relational schema for a relational database, AllElectronics. 10 Chapter 1 Introduction Relational data can be accessed by database queries written in a relational query language (e.g., SQL) or with the assistance of graphical user interfaces. A given query is transformed into a set of relational operations, such as join, selection, and projection, and is then optimized for efﬁcient processing. A query allows retrieval of speciﬁed sub- sets of the data. Suppose that your job is to analyze the AllElectronics data. Through the use of relational queries, you can ask things like, “Show me a list of all items that were sold in the last quarter.” Relational languages also use aggregate functions such as sum, avg (average), count, max (maximum), and min (minimum). Using aggregates allows you to ask: “Show me the total sales of the last month, grouped by branch,” or “How many sales transactions occurred in the month of December?” or “Which salesperson had the highest sales?” When mining relational databases, we can go further by searching for trends or data patterns. For example, data mining systems can analyze customer data to predict the credit risk of new customers based on their income, age, and previous credit information. Data mining systems may also detect deviations—that is, items with sales that are far from those expected in comparison with the previous year. Such deviations can then be further investigated. For example, data mining may discover that there has been a change in packaging of an item or a signiﬁcant increase in price. Relational databases are one of the most commonly available and richest information repositories, and thus they are a major data form in the study of data mining. 1.3.2 Data Warehouses Suppose that AllElectronics is a successful international company with branches around the world. Each branch has its own set of databases. The president of AllElectronics has asked you to provide an analysis of the company’s sales per item type per branch for the third quarter. This is a difﬁcult task, particularly since the relevant data are spread out over several databases physically located at numerous sites. If AllElectronics had a data warehouse, this task would be easy. A data warehouse is a repository of information collected from multiple sources, stored under a uniﬁed schema, and usually residing at a single site. Data warehouses are constructed via a process of data cleaning, data integration, data transformation, data loading, and peri- odic data refreshing. This process is discussed in Chapters 3 and 4. Figure 1.6 shows the typical framework for construction and use of a data warehouse for AllElectronics. To facilitate decision making, the data in a data warehouse are organized around major subjects (e.g., customer, item, supplier, and activity). The data are stored to pro- vide information from a historical perspective, such as in the past 6 to 12 months, and are typically summarized. For example, rather than storing the details of each sales transac- tion, the data warehouse may store a summary of the transactions per item type for each store or, summarized to a higher level, for each sales region. A data warehouse is usually modeled by a multidimensional data structure, called a data cube, in which each dimension corresponds to an attribute or a set of attributes in the schema, and each cell stores the value of some aggregate measure such as count 1.3 What Kinds of Data Can Be Mined? 11 Data source in Chicago Data source in Toronto Data source in Vancouver Data source in New York Data Warehouse Clean Integrate Transform Load Refresh Query and analysis tools Client Client Figure 1.6 Typical framework of a data warehouse for AllElectronics. or sum(sales amount). A data cube provides a multidimensional view of data and allows the precomputation and fast access of summarized data. Example 1.3 A data cube for AllElectronics. A data cube for summarized sales data of AllElectronics is presented in Figure 1.7(a). The cube has three dimensions: address (with city values Chicago, New York, Toronto, Vancouver), time (with quarter values Q1, Q2, Q3, Q4), and item (withitemtypevalueshomeentertainment,computer,phone,security).Theaggregate value stored in each cell of the cube is sales amount (in thousands). For example, the total sales for the ﬁrst quarter, Q1, for the items related to security systems in Vancouver is $400,000,asstoredincell⟨Vancouver,Q1,security⟩.Additionalcubesmaybeusedtostore aggregatesumsovereachdimension,correspondingtotheaggregatevaluesobtainedusing different SQL group-bys (e.g., the total sales amount per city and quarter, or per city and item, or per quarter and item, or per each individual dimension). By providing multidimensional data views and the precomputation of summarized data, data warehouse systems can provide inherent support for OLAP. Online analyti- cal processing operations make use of background knowledge regarding the domain of the data being studied to allow the presentation of data at different levels of abstraction. Such operations accommodate different user viewpoints. Examples of OLAP opera- tions include drill-down and roll-up, which allow the user to view the data at differing degrees of summarization, as illustrated in Figure 1.7(b). For instance, we can drill down on sales data summarized by quarter to see data summarized by month. Sim- ilarly, we can roll up on sales data summarized by city to view data summarized by country. Although data warehouse tools help support data analysis, additional tools for data mining are often needed for in-depth analysis. Multidimensional data mining (also called exploratory multidimensional data mining) performs data mining in 12 Chapter 1 Introduction 605 825 14 400 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Chicago New York Toronto 440 1560 395 Vancouver time (quarters) address (cities) home entertainment computer phone item (types) security <Vancouver, Q1, security> Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 USA Canada 2000 1000 time (quarters) address (countries) home entertainment computer phone item (types) security 150 100 150 Jan Feb March Chicago New York Toronto Vancouver time (months) address (cities) home entertainment computer phone item (types) security Drill-down on time data for Q1 Roll-up on address (a) (b) Figure 1.7 A multidimensional data cube, commonly used for data warehousing, (a) showing summa- rized data for AllElectronics and (b) showing summarized data resulting from drill-down and roll-up operations on the cube in (a). For improved readability, only some of the cube cell values are shown. 1.3 What Kinds of Data Can Be Mined? 13 multidimensional space in an OLAP style. That is, it allows the exploration of mul- tiple combinations of dimensions at varying levels of granularity in data mining, and thus has greater potential for discovering interesting patterns representing knowl- edge. An overview of data warehouse and OLAP technology is provided in Chapter 4. Advanced issues regarding data cube computation and multidimensional data mining are discussed in Chapter 5. 1.3.3 Transactional Data In general, each record in a transactional database captures a transaction, such as a customer’s purchase, a ﬂight booking, or a user’s clicks on a web page. A transaction typ- ically includes a unique transaction identity number (trans ID) and a list of the items making up the transaction, such as the items purchased in the transaction. A trans- actional database may have additional tables, which contain other information related to the transactions, such as item description, information about the salesperson or the branch, and so on. Example 1.4 A transactional database for AllElectronics. Transactions can be stored in a table, with one record per transaction. A fragment of a transactional database for AllElectronics is shown in Figure 1.8. From the relational database point of view, the sales table in the ﬁgure is a nested relation because the attribute list of item IDs contains a set of items. Because most relational database systems do not support nested relational structures, the transactional database is usually either stored in a ﬂat ﬁle in a format similar to the table in Figure 1.8 or unfolded into a standard relation in a format similar to the items sold table in Figure 1.5. As an analyst of AllElectronics, you may ask,“Which items sold well together?” This kind of market basket data analysis would enable you to bundle groups of items together as a strategy for boosting sales. For example, given the knowledge that printers are commonly purchased together with computers, you could offer certain printers at a steep discount (or even for free) to customers buying selected computers, in the hopes of selling more computers (which are often more expensive than printers). A tradi- tional database system is not able to perform market basket data analysis. Fortunately, data mining on transactional data can do so by mining frequent itemsets, that is, sets trans ID list of item IDs T100 I1, I3, I8, I16 T200 I2, I8 ... ... Figure 1.8 Fragment of a transactional database for sales at AllElectronics. 14 Chapter 1 Introduction of items that are frequently sold together. The mining of such frequent patterns from transactional data is discussed in Chapters 6 and 7. 1.3.4 Other Kinds of Data Besides relational database data, data warehouse data, and transaction data, there are many other kinds of data that have versatile forms and structures and rather different semantic meanings. Such kinds of data can be seen in many applications: time-related or sequence data (e.g., historical records, stock exchange data, and time-series and bio- logical sequence data), data streams (e.g., video surveillance and sensor data, which are continuously transmitted), spatial data (e.g., maps), engineering design data (e.g., the design of buildings, system components, or integrated circuits), hypertext and multi- media data (including text, image, video, and audio data), graph and networked data (e.g., social and information networks), and the Web (a huge, widely distributed infor- mation repository made available by the Internet). These applications bring about new challenges, like how to handle data carrying special structures (e.g., sequences, trees, graphs, and networks) and speciﬁc semantics (such as ordering, image, audio and video contents, and connectivity), and how to mine patterns that carry rich structures and semantics. Various kinds of knowledge can be mined from these kinds of data. Here, we list just a few. Regarding temporal data, for instance, we can mine banking data for chang- ing trends, which may aid in the scheduling of bank tellers according to the volume of customer trafﬁc. Stock exchange data can be mined to uncover trends that could help you plan investment strategies (e.g., the best time to purchase AllElectronics stock). We could mine computer network data streams to detect intrusions based on the anomaly of message ﬂows, which may be discovered by clustering, dynamic construction of stream models or by comparing the current frequent patterns with those at a previous time. With spatial data, we may look for patterns that describe changes in metropolitan poverty rates based on city distances from major highways. The relationships among a set of spatial objects can be examined in order to discover which subsets of objects are spatially autocorrelated or associated. By mining text data, such as literature on data mining from the past ten years, we can identify the evolution of hot topics in the ﬁeld. By mining user comments on products (which are often submitted as short text messages), we can assess customer sentiments and understand how well a product is embraced by a market. From multimedia data, we can mine images to identify objects and classify them by assigning semantic labels or tags. By mining video data of a hockey game, we can detect video sequences corresponding to goals. Web mining can help us learn about the distribution of information on the WWW in general, characterize and classify web pages, and uncover web dynamics and the association and other relationships among different web pages, users, communities, and web-based activities. It is important to keep in mind that, in many applications, multiple types of data are present. For example, in web mining, there often exist text data and multimedia data (e.g., pictures and videos) on web pages, graph data like web graphs, and map data on some web sites. In bioinformatics, genomic sequences, biological networks, and 1.4 What Kinds of Patterns Can Be Mined? 15 3-D spatial structures of genomes may coexist for certain biological objects. Mining multiple data sources of complex data often leads to fruitful ﬁndings due to the mutual enhancement and consolidation of such multiple sources. On the other hand, it is also challenging because of the difﬁculties in data cleaning and data integration, as well as the complex interactions among the multiple sources of such data. While such data require sophisticated facilities for efﬁcient storage, retrieval, and updating, they also provide fertile ground and raise challenging research and imple- mentation issues for data mining. Data mining on such data is an advanced topic. The methods involved are extensions of the basic techniques presented in this book. 1.4 What Kinds of Patterns Can Be Mined? We have observed various types of data and information repositories on which data mining can be performed. Let us now examine the kinds of patterns that can be mined. There are a number of data mining functionalities. These include characterization and discrimination (Section 1.4.1); the mining of frequent patterns, associations, and correlations (Section 1.4.2); classiﬁcation and regression (Section 1.4.3); clustering anal- ysis (Section 1.4.4); and outlier analysis (Section 1.4.5). Data mining functionalities are used to specify the kinds of patterns to be found in data mining tasks. In general, such tasks can be classiﬁed into two categories: descriptive and predictive. Descriptive min- ing tasks characterize properties of the data in a target data set. Predictive mining tasks perform induction on the current data in order to make predictions. Data mining functionalities, and the kinds of patterns they can discover, are described below. In addition, Section 1.4.6 looks at what makes a pattern interesting. Interesting patterns represent knowledge. 1.4.1 Class/Concept Description: Characterization and Discrimination Data entries can be associated with classes or concepts. For example, in the AllElectronics store, classes of items for sale include computers and printers, and concepts of customers include bigSpenders and budgetSpenders. It can be useful to describe individual classes and concepts in summarized, concise, and yet precise terms. Such descriptions of a class or a concept are called class/concept descriptions. These descriptions can be derived using (1) data characterization, by summarizing the data of the class under study (often called the target class) in general terms, or (2) data discrimination, by comparison of the target class with one or a set of comparative classes (often called the contrasting classes), or (3) both data characterization and discrimination. Data characterization is a summarization of the general characteristics or features of a target class of data. The data corresponding to the user-speciﬁed class are typically collected by a query. For example, to study the characteristics of software products with sales that increased by 10% in the previous year, the data related to such products can be collected by executing an SQL query on the sales database. 16 Chapter 1 Introduction There are several methods for effective data summarization and characterization. Simple data summaries based on statistical measures and plots are described in Chapter 2. The data cube-based OLAP roll-up operation (Section 1.3.2) can be used to perform user-controlled data summarization along a speciﬁed dimension. This pro- cess is further detailed in Chapters 4 and 5, which discuss data warehousing. An attribute-oriented induction technique can be used to perform data generalization and characterization without step-by-step user interaction. This technique is also described in Chapter 4. The output of data characterization can be presented in various forms. Examples include pie charts, bar charts, curves, multidimensional data cubes, and multidimen- sional tables, including crosstabs. The resulting descriptions can also be presented as generalized relations or in rule form (called characteristic rules). Example 1.5 Data characterization. A customer relationship manager at AllElectronics may order the following data mining task: Summarize the characteristics of customers who spend more than $5000 a year at AllElectronics. The result is a general proﬁle of these customers, such as that they are 40 to 50 years old, employed, and have excellent credit ratings. The data mining system should allow the customer relationship manager to drill down on any dimension, such as on occupation to view these customers according to their type of employment. Data discrimination is a comparison of the general features of the target class data objects against the general features of objects from one or multiple contrasting classes. The target and contrasting classes can be speciﬁed by a user, and the corresponding data objects can be retrieved through database queries. For example, a user may want to compare the general features of software products with sales that increased by 10% last year against those with sales that decreased by at least 30% during the same period. The methods used for data discrimination are similar to those used for data characterization. “How are discrimination descriptions output?” The forms of output presentation are similar to those for characteristic descriptions, although discrimination descrip- tions should include comparative measures that help to distinguish between the target and contrasting classes. Discrimination descriptions expressed in the form of rules are referred to as discriminant rules. Example 1.6 Data discrimination. A customer relationship manager at AllElectronics may want to compare two groups of customers—those who shop for computer products regularly (e.g., more than twice a month) and those who rarely shop for such products (e.g., less than three times a year). The resulting description provides a general comparative proﬁle of these customers, such as that 80% of the customers who frequently purchase computer products are between 20 and 40 years old and have a university education, whereas 60% of the customers who infrequently buy such products are either seniors or youths, and have no university degree. Drilling down on a dimension like occupation, or adding a new dimension like income level, may help to ﬁnd even more discriminative features between the two classes. 1.4 What Kinds of Patterns Can Be Mined? 17 Concept description, including characterization and discrimination, is described in Chapter 4. 1.4.2 Mining Frequent Patterns, Associations, and Correlations Frequent patterns, as the name suggests, are patterns that occur frequently in data. There are many kinds of frequent patterns, including frequent itemsets, frequent sub- sequences (also known as sequential patterns), and frequent substructures. A frequent itemset typically refers to a set of items that often appear together in a transactional data set—for example, milk and bread, which are frequently bought together in gro- cery stores by many customers. A frequently occurring subsequence, such as the pattern that customers, tend to purchase ﬁrst a laptop, followed by a digital camera, and then a memory card, is a (frequent) sequential pattern. A substructure can refer to different structural forms (e.g., graphs, trees, or lattices) that may be combined with itemsets or subsequences. If a substructure occurs frequently, it is called a (frequent) structured pattern. Mining frequent patterns leads to the discovery of interesting associations and correlations within data. Example 1.7 Association analysis. Suppose that, as a marketing manager at AllElectronics, you want to know which items are frequently purchased together (i.e., within the same transac- tion). An example of such a rule, mined from the AllElectronics transactional database, is buys(X,“computer”) ⇒buys(X,“software”) [support = 1%,conﬁdence = 50%], where X is a variable representing a customer. A conﬁdence, or certainty, of 50% means that if a customer buys a computer, there is a 50% chance that she will buy software as well. A 1% support means that 1% of all the transactions under analysis show that computer and software are purchased together. This association rule involves a single attribute or predicate (i.e., buys) that repeats. Association rules that contain a single predicate are referred to as single-dimensional association rules. Dropping the predicate notation, the rule can be written simply as “computer ⇒software [1%, 50%].” Suppose, instead, that we are given the AllElectronics relational database related to purchases. A data mining system may ﬁnd association rules like age(X, “20..29”) ∧income(X, “40K..49K”) ⇒buys(X, “laptop”) [support = 2%, conﬁdence = 60%]. The rule indicates that of the AllElectronics customers under study, 2% are 20 to 29 years old with an income of $40,000 to $49,000 and have purchased a laptop (computer) at AllElectronics. There is a 60% probability that a customer in this age and income group will purchase a laptop. Note that this is an association involving more than one attribute or predicate (i.e., age, income, and buys). Adopting the terminology used in multidimensional databases, where each attribute is referred to as a dimension, the above rule can be referred to as a multidimensional association rule. 18 Chapter 1 Introduction Typically, association rules are discarded as uninteresting if they do not satisfy both a minimum support threshold and a minimum conﬁdence threshold. Additional anal- ysis can be performed to uncover interesting statistical correlations between associated attribute–value pairs. Frequent itemset mining is a fundamental form of frequent pattern mining. The min- ing of frequent patterns, associations, and correlations is discussed in Chapters 6 and 7, where particular emphasis is placed on efﬁcient algorithms for frequent itemset min- ing. Sequential pattern mining and structured pattern mining are considered advanced topics. 1.4.3 Classiﬁcation and Regression for Predictive Analysis Classiﬁcation is the process of ﬁnding a model (or function) that describes and distin- guishes data classes or concepts. The model are derived based on the analysis of a set of training data (i.e., data objects for which the class labels are known). The model is used to predict the class label of objects for which the the class label is unknown. “How is the derived model presented?” The derived model may be represented in var- ious forms, such as classiﬁcation rules (i.e., IF-THEN rules), decision trees, mathematical formulae,orneuralnetworks (Figure1.9).Adecisiontreeisaﬂowchart-liketreestructure, where each node denotes a test on an attribute value, each branch represents an outcome of the test, and tree leaves represent classes or class distributions. Decision trees can easily (a) age(X, “youth”) AND income(X, “high”) age(X, “youth”) AND income(X, “low”) age(X, “middle_aged”) age(X, “senior”) class(X, “A”) class(X, “B”) class(X, “C”) class(X, “C”) middle_aged, senior (b) (c) age? age f1 f2 f3 f4 f5 f6 f7 f8 income? income youth high low class A class A class C class C class B class B Figure 1.9 A classiﬁcation model can be represented in various forms: (a) IF-THEN rules, (b) a decision tree, or (c) a neural network. 1.4 What Kinds of Patterns Can Be Mined? 19 beconvertedtoclassiﬁcationrules.A neuralnetwork,whenusedforclassiﬁcation,istyp- ically a collection of neuron-like processing units with weighted connections between the units. There are many other methods for constructing classiﬁcation models, such as na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁcation, support vector machines, and k-nearest-neighbor classiﬁcation. Whereas classiﬁcation predicts categorical (discrete, unordered) labels, regression models continuous-valued functions. That is, regression is used to predict missing or unavailable numerical data values rather than (discrete) class labels. The term prediction refers to both numeric prediction and class label prediction. Regression analysis is a statistical methodology that is most often used for numeric prediction, although other methods exist as well. Regression also encompasses the identiﬁcation of distribution trends based on the available data. Classiﬁcation and regression may need to be preceded by relevance analysis, which attempts to identify attributes that are signiﬁcantly relevant to the classiﬁcation and regression process. Such attributes will be selected for the classiﬁcation and regression process. Other attributes, which are irrelevant, can then be excluded from consideration. Example 1.8 Classiﬁcation and regression. Suppose as a sales manager of AllElectronics you want to classify a large set of items in the store, based on three kinds of responses to a sales cam- paign: good response, mild response and no response. You want to derive a model for each of these three classes based on the descriptive features of the items, such as price, brand, place made, type, and category. The resulting classiﬁcation should maximally distinguish each class from the others, presenting an organized picture of the data set. Suppose that the resulting classiﬁcation is expressed as a decision tree. The decision tree, for instance, may identify price as being the single factor that best distinguishes the three classes. The tree may reveal that, in addition to price, other features that help to further distinguish objects of each class from one another include brand and place made. Such a decision tree may help you understand the impact of the given sales campaign and design a more effective campaign in the future. Suppose instead, that rather than predicting categorical response labels for each store item, you would like to predict the amount of revenue that each item will generate during an upcoming sale at AllElectronics, based on the previous sales data. This is an example of regression analysis because the regression model constructed will predict a continuous function (or ordered value.) Chapters 8 and 9 discuss classiﬁcation in further detail. Regression analysis is beyond the scope of this book. Sources for further information are given in the bibliographic notes. 1.4.4 Cluster Analysis Unlike classiﬁcation and regression, which analyze class-labeled (training) data sets, clustering analyzes data objects without consulting class labels. In many cases, class- labeled data may simply not exist at the beginning. Clustering can be used to generate 20 Chapter 1 Introduction Figure 1.10 A 2-D plot of customer data with respect to customer locations in a city, showing three data clusters. class labels for a group of data. The objects are clustered or grouped based on the princi- ple of maximizing the intraclass similarity and minimizing the interclass similarity. That is, clusters of objects are formed so that objects within a cluster have high similarity in com- parison to one another, but are rather dissimilar to objects in other clusters. Each cluster so formed can be viewed as a class of objects, from which rules can be derived. Clus- tering can also facilitate taxonomy formation, that is, the organization of observations into a hierarchy of classes that group similar events together. Example 1.9 Cluster analysis. Cluster analysis can be performed on AllElectronics customer data to identify homogeneous subpopulations of customers. These clusters may represent indi- vidual target groups for marketing. Figure 1.10 shows a 2-D plot of customers with respect to customer locations in a city. Three clusters of data points are evident. Cluster analysis forms the topic of Chapters 10 and 11. 1.4.5 Outlier Analysis A data set may contain objects that do not comply with the general behavior or model of the data. These data objects are outliers. Many data mining methods discard outliers as noise or exceptions. However, in some applications (e.g., fraud detection) the rare 1.4 What Kinds of Patterns Can Be Mined? 21 events can be more interesting than the more regularly occurring ones. The analysis of outlier data is referred to as outlier analysis or anomaly mining. Outliers may be detected using statistical tests that assume a distribution or proba- bility model for the data, or using distance measures where objects that are remote from any other cluster are considered outliers. Rather than using statistical or distance mea- sures, density-based methods may identify outliers in a local region, although they look normal from a global statistical distribution view. Example 1.10 Outlier analysis. Outlier analysis may uncover fraudulent usage of credit cards by detecting purchases of unusually large amounts for a given account number in compari- son to regular charges incurred by the same account. Outlier values may also be detected with respect to the locations and types of purchase, or the purchase frequency. Outlier analysis is discussed in Chapter 12. 1.4.6 Are All Patterns Interesting? A data mining system has the potential to generate thousands or even millions of patterns, or rules. You may ask, “Are all of the patterns interesting?” Typically, the answer is no—only a small fraction of the patterns potentially generated would actually be of interest to a given user. This raises some serious questions for data mining. You may wonder, “What makes a pattern interesting? Can a data mining system generate all of the interesting patterns? Or, Can the system generate only the interesting ones?” To answer the ﬁrst question, a pattern is interesting if it is (1) easily understood by humans, (2) valid on new or test data with some degree of certainty, (3) potentially useful, and (4) novel. A pattern is also interesting if it validates a hypothesis that the user sought to conﬁrm. An interesting pattern represents knowledge. Several objective measures of pattern interestingness exist. These are based on the structure of discovered patterns and the statistics underlying them. An objective measure for association rules of the form X ⇒Y is rule support, representing the per- centage of transactions from a transaction database that the given rule satisﬁes. This is taken to be the probability P(X ∪Y), where X ∪Y indicates that a transaction contains both X and Y, that is, the union of itemsets X and Y. Another objective measure for association rules is conﬁdence, which assesses the degree of certainty of the detected association. This is taken to be the conditional probability P(Y|X), that is, the prob- ability that a transaction containing X also contains Y. More formally, support and conﬁdence are deﬁned as support(X ⇒Y) = P(X ∪Y), conﬁdence(X ⇒Y) = P(Y|X). In general, each interestingness measure is associated with a threshold, which may be controlled by the user. For example, rules that do not satisfy a conﬁdence threshold of, 22 Chapter 1 Introduction say, 50% can be considered uninteresting. Rules below the threshold likely reﬂect noise, exceptions, or minority cases and are probably of less value. Other objective interestingness measures include accuracy and coverage for classiﬁca- tion (IF-THEN) rules. In general terms, accuracy tells us the percentage of data that are correctly classiﬁed by a rule. Coverage is similar to support, in that it tells us the per- centage of data to which a rule applies. Regarding understandability, we may use simple objective measures that assess the complexity or length in bits of the patterns mined. Although objective measures help identify interesting patterns, they are often insufﬁ- cient unless combined with subjective measures that reﬂect a particular user’s needs and interests. For example, patterns describing the characteristics of customers who shop frequently at AllElectronics should be interesting to the marketing manager, but may be of little interest to other analysts studying the same database for patterns on employee performance. Furthermore, many patterns that are interesting by objective standards may represent common sense and, therefore, are actually uninteresting. Subjective interestingness measures are based on user beliefs in the data. These measures ﬁnd patterns interesting if the patterns are unexpected (contradicting a user’s belief) or offer strategic information on which the user can act. In the latter case, such patterns are referred to as actionable. For example, patterns like “a large earthquake often follows a cluster of small quakes” may be highly actionable if users can act on the information to save lives. Patterns that are expected can be interesting if they conﬁrm a hypothesis that the user wishes to validate or they resemble a user’s hunch. The second question—“Can a data mining system generate all of the interesting pat- terns?”—refers to the completeness of a data mining algorithm. It is often unrealistic and inefﬁcient for data mining systems to generate all possible patterns. Instead, user- provided constraints and interestingness measures should be used to focus the search. For some mining tasks, such as association, this is often sufﬁcient to ensure the com- pleteness of the algorithm. Association rule mining is an example where the use of constraints and interestingness measures can ensure the completeness of mining. The methods involved are examined in detail in Chapter 6. Finally, the third question—“Can a data mining system generate only interesting pat- terns?”—is an optimization problem in data mining. It is highly desirable for data mining systems to generate only interesting patterns. This would be efﬁcient for users and data mining systems because neither would have to search through the patterns gen- erated to identify the truly interesting ones. Progress has been made in this direction; however, such optimization remains a challenging issue in data mining. Measures of pattern interestingness are essential for the efﬁcient discovery of patterns by target users. Such measures can be used after the data mining step to rank the dis- covered patterns according to their interestingness, ﬁltering out the uninteresting ones. More important, such measures can be used to guide and constrain the discovery pro- cess, improving the search efﬁciency by pruning away subsets of the pattern space that do not satisfy prespeciﬁed interestingness constraints. Examples of such a constraint- based mining process are described in Chapter 7 (with respect to pattern discovery) and Chapter 11 (with respect to clustering). 1.5 Which Technologies Are Used? 23 Methods to assess pattern interestingness, and their use to improve data mining efﬁ- ciency, are discussed throughout the book with respect to each kind of pattern that can be mined. 1.5 Which Technologies Are Used? As a highly application-driven domain, data mining has incorporated many techniques from other domains such as statistics, machine learning, pattern recognition, database and data warehouse systems, information retrieval, visualization, algorithms, high- performance computing, and many application domains (Figure 1.11). The interdisci- plinary nature of data mining research and development contributes signiﬁcantly to the success of data mining and its extensive applications. In this section, we give examples of several disciplines that strongly inﬂuence the development of data mining methods. 1.5.1 Statistics Statistics studies the collection, analysis, interpretation or explanation, and presentation of data. Data mining has an inherent connection with statistics. A statistical model is a set of mathematical functions that describe the behavior of the objects in a target class in terms of random variables and their associated proba- bility distributions. Statistical models are widely used to model data and data classes. For example, in data mining tasks like data characterization and classiﬁcation, statistical Statistics Machine learning Pattern recognition Visualization Algorithms High-performance computing Applications Information retrieval Data warehouse Database systems Data Mining Figure 1.11 Data mining adopts techniques from many domains. 24 Chapter 1 Introduction models of target classes can be built. In other words, such statistical models can be the outcome of a data mining task. Alternatively, data mining tasks can be built on top of statistical models. For example, we can use statistics to model noise and missing data values. Then, when mining patterns in a large data set, the data mining process can use the model to help identify and handle noisy or missing values in the data. Statistics research develops tools for prediction and forecasting using data and sta- tistical models. Statistical methods can be used to summarize or describe a collection of data. Basic statistical descriptions of data are introduced in Chapter 2. Statistics is useful for mining various patterns from data as well as for understanding the underlying mechanisms generating and affecting the patterns. Inferential statistics (or predictive statistics) models data in a way that accounts for randomness and uncertainty in the observations and is used to draw inferences about the process or population under investigation. Statistical methods can also be used to verify data mining results. For example, after a classiﬁcation or prediction model is mined, the model should be veriﬁed by statisti- cal hypothesis testing. A statistical hypothesis test (sometimes called conﬁrmatory data analysis) makes statistical decisions using experimental data. A result is called statistically signiﬁcant if it is unlikely to have occurred by chance. If the classiﬁcation or prediction model holds true, then the descriptive statistics of the model increases the soundness of the model. Applying statistical methods in data mining is far from trivial. Often, a serious chal- lenge is how to scale up a statistical method over a large data set. Many statistical methods have high complexity in computation. When such methods are applied on large data sets that are also distributed on multiple logical or physical sites, algorithms should be carefully designed and tuned to reduce the computational cost. This challenge becomes even tougher for online applications, such as online query suggestions in search engines, where data mining is required to continuously handle fast, real-time data streams. 1.5.2 Machine Learning Machine learning investigates how computers can learn (or improve their performance) based on data. A main research area is for computer programs to automatically learn to recognize complex patterns and make intelligent decisions based on data. For example, a typical machine learning problem is to program a computer so that it can automatically recognize handwritten postal codes on mail after learning from a set of examples. Machine learning is a fast-growing discipline. Here, we illustrate classic problems in machine learning that are highly related to data mining. Supervised learning is basically a synonym for classiﬁcation. The supervision in the learning comes from the labeled examples in the training data set. For example, in the postal code recognition problem, a set of handwritten postal code images and their corresponding machine-readable translations are used as the training examples, which supervise the learning of the classiﬁcation model. 1.5 Which Technologies Are Used? 25 Unsupervised learning is essentially a synonym for clustering. The learning process is unsupervised since the input examples are not class labeled. Typically, we may use clustering to discover classes within the data. For example, an unsupervised learning method can take, as input, a set of images of handwritten digits. Suppose that it ﬁnds 10 clusters of data. These clusters may correspond to the 10 distinct digits of 0 to 9, respectively. However, since the training data are not labeled, the learned model cannot tell us the semantic meaning of the clusters found. Semi-supervised learning is a class of machine learning techniques that make use of both labeled and unlabeled examples when learning a model. In one approach, labeled examples are used to learn class models and unlabeled examples are used to reﬁne the boundaries between classes. For a two-class problem, we can think of the set of examples belonging to one class as the positive examples and those belonging to the other class as the negative examples. In Figure 1.12, if we do not consider the unlabeled examples, the dashed line is the decision boundary that best partitions the positive examples from the negative examples. Using the unlabeled examples, we can reﬁne the decision boundary to the solid line. Moreover, we can detect that the two positive examples at the top right corner, though labeled, are likely noise or outliers. Active learning is a machine learning approach that lets users play an active role in the learning process. An active learning approach can ask a user (e.g., a domain expert) to label an example, which may be from a set of unlabeled examples or synthesized by the learning program. The goal is to optimize the model quality by actively acquiring knowledge from human users, given a constraint on how many examples they can be asked to label. Positive example Negative example Unlabeled example Decision boundary without unlabeled examples Decision boundary with unlabeled examples Noise/outliers Figure 1.12 Semi-supervised learning. 26 Chapter 1 Introduction You can see there are many similarities between data mining and machine learning. For classiﬁcation and clustering tasks, machine learning research often focuses on the accuracy of the model. In addition to accuracy, data mining research places strong emphasis on the efﬁciency and scalability of mining methods on large data sets, as well as on ways to handle complex types of data and explore new, alternative methods. 1.5.3 Database Systems and Data Warehouses Database systems research focuses on the creation, maintenance, and use of databases for organizations and end-users. Particularly, database systems researchers have estab- lished highly recognized principles in data models, query languages, query processing and optimization methods, data storage, and indexing and accessing methods. Database systems are often well known for their high scalability in processing very large, relatively structured data sets. Many data mining tasks need to handle large data sets or even real-time, fast stream- ing data. Therefore, data mining can make good use of scalable database technologies to achieve high efﬁciency and scalability on large data sets. Moreover, data mining tasks can be used to extend the capability of existing database systems to satisfy advanced users’ sophisticated data analysis requirements. Recent database systems have built systematic data analysis capabilities on database data using data warehousing and data mining facilities. A data warehouse integrates data originating from multiple sources and various timeframes. It consolidates data in multidimensional space to form partially materialized data cubes. The data cube model not only facilitates OLAP in multidimensional databases but also promotes multidimensional data mining (see Section 1.3.2). 1.5.4 Information Retrieval Information retrieval (IR) is the science of searching for documents or information in documents. Documents can be text or multimedia, and may reside on the Web. The differences between traditional information retrieval and database systems are twofold: Information retrieval assumes that (1) the data under search are unstructured; and (2) the queries are formed mainly by keywords, which do not have complex structures (unlike SQL queries in database systems). The typical approaches in information retrieval adopt probabilistic models. For example, a text document can be regarded as a bag of words, that is, a multiset of words appearing in the document. The document’s language model is the probability density function that generates the bag of words in the document. The similarity between two documents can be measured by the similarity between their corresponding language models. Furthermore, a topic in a set of text documents can be modeled as a probability dis- tribution over the vocabulary, which is called a topic model. A text document, which may involve one or multiple topics, can be regarded as a mixture of multiple topic mod- els. By integrating information retrieval models and data mining techniques, we can ﬁnd 1.6 Which Kinds of Applications Are Targeted? 27 the major topics in a collection of documents and, for each document in the collection, the major topics involved. Increasingly large amounts of text and multimedia data have been accumulated and made available online due to the fast growth of the Web and applications such as dig- ital libraries, digital governments, and health care information systems. Their effective search and analysis have raised many challenging issues in data mining. Therefore, text mining and multimedia data mining, integrated with information retrieval methods, have become increasingly important. 1.6 Which Kinds of Applications Are Targeted? Where there are data, there are data mining applications As a highly application-driven discipline, data mining has seen great successes in many applications. It is impossible to enumerate all applications where data mining plays a critical role. Presentations of data mining in knowledge-intensive application domains, such as bioinformatics and software engineering, require more in-depth treatment and are beyond the scope of this book. To demonstrate the importance of applications as a major dimension in data mining research and development, we brieﬂy discuss two highly successful and popular application examples of data mining: business intelligence and search engines. 1.6.1 Business Intelligence It is critical for businesses to acquire a better understanding of the commercial context of their organization, such as their customers, the market, supply and resources, and competitors. Business intelligence (BI) technologies provide historical, current, and predictive views of business operations. Examples include reporting, online analytical processing, business performance management, competitive intelligence, benchmark- ing, and predictive analytics. “How important is business intelligence?” Without data mining, many businesses may not be able to perform effective market analysis, compare customer feedback on simi- lar products, discover the strengths and weaknesses of their competitors, retain highly valuable customers, and make smart business decisions. Clearly, data mining is the core of business intelligence. Online analytical process- ing tools in business intelligence rely on data warehousing and multidimensional data mining. Classiﬁcation and prediction techniques are the core of predictive analytics in business intelligence, for which there are many applications in analyzing markets, supplies, and sales. Moreover, clustering plays a central role in customer relationship management, which groups customers based on their similarities. Using characteriza- tion mining techniques, we can better understand features of each customer group and develop customized customer reward programs. 28 Chapter 1 Introduction 1.6.2 Web Search Engines A Web search engine is a specialized computer server that searches for information on the Web. The search results of a user query are often returned as a list (sometimes called hits). The hits may consist of web pages, images, and other types of ﬁles. Some search engines also search and return data available in public databases or open directo- ries. Search engines differ from web directories in that web directories are maintained by human editors whereas search engines operate algorithmically or by a mixture of algorithmic and human input. Web search engines are essentially very large data mining applications. Various data mining techniques are used in all aspects of search engines, ranging from crawling5 (e.g., deciding which pages should be crawled and the crawling frequencies), indexing (e.g., selecting pages to be indexed and deciding to which extent the index should be constructed), and searching (e.g., deciding how pages should be ranked, which adver- tisements should be added, and how the search results can be personalized or made “context aware”). Search engines pose grand challenges to data mining. First, they have to handle a huge and ever-growing amount of data. Typically, such data cannot be processed using one or a few machines. Instead, search engines often need to use computer clouds, which consist of thousands or even hundreds of thousands