of computers that collaboratively mine the huge amount of data. Scaling up data mining methods over computer clouds and large distributed data sets is an area for further research. Second, Web search engines often have to deal with online data. A search engine may be able to afford constructing a model ofﬂine on huge data sets. To do this, it may construct a query classiﬁer that assigns a search query to predeﬁned categories based on the query topic (i.e., whether the search query “apple” is meant to retrieve information about a fruit or a brand of computers). Whether a model is constructed ofﬂine, the application of the model online must be fast enough to answer user queries in real time. Another challenge is maintaining and incrementally updating a model on fast- growing data streams. For example, a query classiﬁer may need to be incrementally maintained continuously since new queries keep emerging and predeﬁned categories and the data distribution may change. Most of the existing model training methods are ofﬂine and static and thus cannot be used in such a scenario. Third, Web search engines often have to deal with queries that are asked only a very small number of times. Suppose a search engine wants to provide context-aware query recommendations. That is, when a user poses a query, the search engine tries to infer the context of the query using the user’s proﬁle and his query history in order to return more customized answers within a small fraction of a second. However, although the total number of queries asked can be huge, most of the queries may be asked only once or a few times. Such severely skewed data are challenging for many data mining and machine learning methods. 5A Web crawler is a computer program that browses the Web in a methodical, automated manner. 1.7 Major Issues in Data Mining 29 1.7 Major Issues in Data Mining Life is short but art is long. – Hippocrates Data mining is a dynamic and fast-expanding ﬁeld with great strengths. In this section, we brieﬂy outline the major issues in data mining research, partitioning them into ﬁve groups: mining methodology, user interaction, efﬁciency and scalability, diversity of data types, and data mining and society. Many of these issues have been addressed in recent data mining research and development to a certain extent and are now consid- ered data mining requirements; others are still at the research stage. The issues continue to stimulate further investigation and improvement in data mining. 1.7.1 Mining Methodology Researchers have been vigorously developing new data mining methodologies. This involves the investigation of new kinds of knowledge, mining in multidimensional space, integrating methods from other disciplines, and the consideration of semantic ties among data objects. In addition, mining methodologies should consider issues such as data uncertainty, noise, and incompleteness. Some mining methods explore how user- speciﬁed measures can be used to assess the interestingness of discovered patterns as well as guide the discovery process. Let’s have a look at these various aspects of mining methodology. Mining various and new kinds of knowledge: Data mining covers a wide spectrum of data analysis and knowledge discovery tasks, from data characterization and discrim- ination to association and correlation analysis, classiﬁcation, regression, clustering, outlier analysis, sequence analysis, and trend and evolution analysis. These tasks may use the same database in different ways and require the development of numerous data mining techniques. Due to the diversity of applications, new mining tasks con- tinue to emerge, making data mining a dynamic and fast-growing ﬁeld. For example, for effective knowledge discovery in information networks, integrated clustering and ranking may lead to the discovery of high-quality clusters and object ranks in large networks. Mining knowledge in multidimensional space: When searching for knowledge in large data sets, we can explore the data in multidimensional space. That is, we can search for interesting patterns among combinations of dimensions (attributes) at varying levels of abstraction. Such mining is known as (exploratory) multidimensional data mining. In many cases, data can be aggregated or viewed as a multidimensional data cube. Mining knowledge in cube space can substantially enhance the power and ﬂexibility of data mining. Data mining—an interdisciplinary effort: The power of data mining can be substan- tially enhanced by integrating new methods from multiple disciplines. For example, 30 Chapter 1 Introduction to mine data with natural language text, it makes sense to fuse data mining methods with methods of information retrieval and natural language processing. As another example, consider the mining of software bugs in large programs. This form of min- ing, known as bug mining, beneﬁts from the incorporation of software engineering knowledge into the data mining process. Boosting the power of discovery in a networked environment: Most data objects reside in a linked or interconnected environment, whether it be the Web, database rela- tions, ﬁles, or documents. Semantic links across multiple data objects can be used to advantage in data mining. Knowledge derived in one set of objects can be used to boost the discovery of knowledge in a “related” or semantically linked set of objects. Handling uncertainty, noise, or incompleteness of data: Data often contain noise, errors, exceptions, or uncertainty, or are incomplete. Errors and noise may confuse the data mining process, leading to the derivation of erroneous patterns. Data clean- ing, data preprocessing, outlier detection and removal, and uncertainty reasoning are examples of techniques that need to be integrated with the data mining process. Pattern evaluation and pattern- or constraint-guided mining: Not all the patterns gen- erated by data mining processes are interesting. What makes a pattern interesting may vary from user to user. Therefore, techniques are needed to assess the inter- estingness of discovered patterns based on subjective measures. These estimate the value of patterns with respect to a given user class, based on user beliefs or expec- tations. Moreover, by using interestingness measures or user-speciﬁed constraints to guide the discovery process, we may generate more interesting patterns and reduce the search space. 1.7.2 User Interaction The user plays an important role in the data mining process. Interesting areas of research include how to interact with a data mining system, how to incorporate a user’s back- ground knowledge in mining, and how to visualize and comprehend data mining results. We introduce each of these here. Interactive mining: The data mining process should be highly interactive. Thus, it is important to build ﬂexible user interfaces and an exploratory mining environment, facilitating the user’s interaction with the system. A user may like to ﬁrst sample a set of data, explore general characteristics of the data, and estimate potential min- ing results. Interactive mining should allow users to dynamically change the focus of a search, to reﬁne mining requests based on returned results, and to drill, dice, and pivot through the data and knowledge space interactively, dynamically exploring “cube space” while mining. Incorporation of background knowledge: Background knowledge, constraints, rules, and other information regarding the domain under study should be incorporated 1.7 Major Issues in Data Mining 31 into the knowledge discovery process. Such knowledge can be used for pattern evaluation as well as to guide the search toward interesting patterns. Ad hoc data mining and data mining query languages: Query languages (e.g., SQL) have played an important role in ﬂexible searching because they allow users to pose ad hoc queries. Similarly, high-level data mining query languages or other high-level ﬂexible user interfaces will give users the freedom to deﬁne ad hoc data mining tasks. This should facilitate speciﬁcation of the relevant sets of data for analysis, the domain knowledge, the kinds of knowledge to be mined, and the conditions and constraints to be enforced on the discovered patterns. Optimization of the processing of such ﬂexible mining requests is another promising area of study. Presentation and visualization of data mining results: How can a data mining system present data mining results, vividly and ﬂexibly, so that the discovered knowledge can be easily understood and directly usable by humans? This is especially crucial if the data mining process is interactive. It requires the system to adopt expressive knowledge representations, user-friendly interfaces, and visualization techniques. 1.7.3 Efﬁciency and Scalability Efﬁciency and scalability are always considered when comparing data mining algo- rithms. As data amounts continue to multiply, these two factors are especially critical. Efﬁciency and scalability of data mining algorithms: Data mining algorithms must be efﬁcient and scalable in order to effectively extract information from huge amounts of data in many data repositories or in dynamic data streams. In other words, the running time of a data mining algorithm must be predictable, short, and acceptable by applications. Efﬁciency, scalability, performance, optimization, and the ability to execute in real time are key criteria that drive the development of many new data mining algorithms. Parallel, distributed, and incremental mining algorithms: The humongous size of many data sets, the wide distribution of data, and the computational complexity of some data mining methods are factors that motivate the development of parallel and dis- tributed data-intensive mining algorithms. Such algorithms ﬁrst partition the data into “pieces.” Each piece is processed, in parallel, by searching for patterns. The par- allel processes may interact with one another. The patterns from each partition are eventually merged. Cloud computing and cluster computing, which use computers in a distributed and collaborative way to tackle very large-scale computational tasks, are also active research themes in parallel data mining. In addition, the high cost of some data min- ing processes and the incremental nature of input promote incremental data mining, which incorporates new data updates without having to mine the entire data “from scratch.” Such methods perform knowledge modiﬁcation incrementally to amend and strengthen what was previously discovered. 32 Chapter 1 Introduction 1.7.4 Diversity of Database Types The wide diversity of database types brings about challenges to data mining. These include Handling complex types of data: Diverse applications generate a wide spectrum of new data types, from structured data such as relational and data warehouse data to semi-structured and unstructured data; from stable data repositories to dynamic data streams; from simple data objects to temporal data, biological sequences, sensor data, spatial data, hypertext data, multimedia data, software program code, Web data, and social network data. It is unrealistic to expect one data mining system to mine all kinds of data, given the diversity of data types and the different goals of data mining. Domain- or application-dedicated data mining systems are being constructed for in- depth mining of speciﬁc kinds of data. The construction of effective and efﬁcient data mining tools for diverse applications remains a challenging and active area of research. Mining dynamic, networked, and global data repositories: Multiple sources of data are connected by the Internet and various kinds of networks, forming gigantic, dis- tributed, and heterogeneous global information systems and networks. The discovery of knowledge from different sources of structured, semi-structured, or unstructured yet interconnected data with diverse data semantics poses great challenges to data mining. Mining such gigantic, interconnected information networks may help dis- close many more patterns and knowledge in heterogeneous data sets than can be dis- covered from a small set of isolated data repositories. Web mining, multisource data mining, and information network mining have become challenging and fast-evolving data mining ﬁelds. 1.7.5 Data Mining and Society How does data mining impact society? What steps can data mining take to preserve the privacy of individuals? Do we use data mining in our daily lives without even knowing that we do? These questions raise the following issues: Social impacts of data mining: With data mining penetrating our everyday lives, it is important to study the impact of data mining on society. How can we use data mining technology to beneﬁt society? How can we guard against its misuse? The improper disclosure or use of data and the potential violation of individual privacy and data protection rights are areas of concern that need to be addressed. Privacy-preserving data mining: Data mining will help scientiﬁc discovery, business management, economy recovery, and security protection (e.g., the real-time dis- covery of intruders and cyberattacks). However, it poses the risk of disclosing an individual’s personal information. Studies on privacy-preserving data publishing and data mining are ongoing. The philosophy is to observe data sensitivity and preserve people’s privacy while performing successful data mining. 1.8 Summary 33 Invisible data mining: We cannot expect everyone in society to learn and master data mining techniques. More and more systems should have data mining func- tions built within so that people can perform data mining or use data mining results simply by mouse clicking, without any knowledge of data mining algorithms. Intelli- gent search engines and Internet-based stores perform such invisible data mining by incorporating data mining into their components to improve their functionality and performance. This is done often unbeknownst to the user. For example, when pur- chasing items online, users may be unaware that the store is likely collecting data on the buying patterns of its customers, which may be used to recommend other items for purchase in the future. These issues and many additional ones relating to the research, development, and application of data mining are discussed throughout the book. 1.8 Summary Necessity is the mother of invention. With the mounting growth of data in every appli- cation, data mining meets the imminent need for effective, scalable, and ﬂexible data analysis in our society. Data mining can be considered as a natural evolution of infor- mation technology and a conﬂuence of several related disciplines and application domains. Data mining is the process of discovering interesting patterns from massive amounts of data. As a knowledge discovery process, it typically involves data cleaning, data inte- gration, data selection, data transformation, pattern discovery, pattern evaluation, and knowledge presentation. A pattern is interesting if it is valid on test data with some degree of certainty, novel, potentially useful (e.g., can be acted on or validates a hunch about which the user was curious), and easily understood by humans. Interesting patterns represent knowl- edge. Measures of pattern interestingness, either objective or subjective, can be used to guide the discovery process. We present a multidimensional view of data mining. The major dimensions are data, knowledge, technologies, and applications. Data mining can be conducted on any kind of data as long as the data are meaningful for a target application, such as database data, data warehouse data, transactional data, and advanced data types. Advanced data types include time-related or sequence data, data streams, spatial and spatiotemporal data, text and multimedia data, graph and networked data, and Web data. A data warehouse is a repository for long-term storage of data from multiple sources, organized so as to facilitate management decision making. The data are stored under a uniﬁed schema and are typically summarized. Data warehouse systems pro- vide multidimensional data analysis capabilities, collectively referred to as online analytical processing. 34 Chapter 1 Introduction Multidimensional data mining (also called exploratory multidimensional data mining) integrates core data mining techniques with OLAP-based multidimen- sional analysis. It searches for interesting patterns among multiple combinations of dimensions (attributes) at varying levels of abstraction, thereby exploring multi- dimensional data space. Data mining functionalities are used to specify the kinds of patterns or knowledge to be found in data mining tasks. The functionalities include characterization and discrimination; the mining of frequent patterns, associations, and correlations; clas- siﬁcation and regression; cluster analysis; and outlier detection. As new types of data, new applications, and new analysis demands continue to emerge, there is no doubt we will see more and more novel data mining tasks in the future. Data mining, as a highly application-driven domain, has incorporated technologies from many other domains. These include statistics, machine learning, database and data warehouse systems, and information retrieval. The interdisciplinary nature of data mining research and development contributes signiﬁcantly to the success of data mining and its extensive applications. Data mining has many successful applications, such as business intelligence, Web search, bioinformatics, health informatics, ﬁnance, digital libraries, and digital governments. There are many challenging issues in data mining research. Areas include mining methodology, user interaction, efﬁciency and scalability, and dealing with diverse data types. Data mining research has strongly impacted society and will continue to do so in the future. 1.9 Exercises 1.1 What is data mining? In your answer, address the following: (a) Is it another hype? (b) Is it a simple transformation or application of technology developed from databases, statistics, machine learning, and pattern recognition? (c) We have presented a view that data mining is the result of the evolution of database technology. Do you think that data mining is also the result of the evolution of machine learning research? Can you present such views based on the historical progress of this discipline? Address the same for the ﬁelds of statistics and pattern recognition. (d) Describe the steps involved in data mining when viewed as a process of knowledge discovery. 1.2 How is a data warehouse different from a database? How are they similar? 1.3 Deﬁne each of the following data mining functionalities: characterization, discrimi- nation, association and correlation analysis, classiﬁcation, regression, clustering, and 1.10 Bibliographic Notes 35 outlier analysis. Give examples of each data mining functionality, using a real-life database that you are familiar with. 1.4 Present an example where data mining is crucial to the success of a business. What data mining functionalities does this business need (e.g., think of the kinds of patterns that could be mined)? Can such patterns be generated alternatively by data query processing or simple statistical analysis? 1.5 Explain the difference and similarity between discrimination and classiﬁcation, between characterization and clustering, and between classiﬁcation and regression. 1.6 Based on your observations, describe another possible kind of knowledge that needs to be discovered by data mining methods but has not been listed in this chapter. Does it require a mining methodology that is quite different from those outlined in this chapter? 1.7 Outliers are often discarded as noise. However, one person’s garbage could be another’s treasure. For example, exceptions in credit card transactions can help us detect the fraudulent use of credit cards. Using fraudulence detection as an example, propose two methods that can be used to detect outliers and discuss which one is more reliable. 1.8 Describe three challenges to data mining regarding data mining methodology and user interaction issues. 1.9 What are the major challenges of mining a huge amount of data (e.g., billions of tuples) in comparison with mining a small amount of data (e.g., data set of a few hundred tuple)? 1.10 Outline the major research challenges of data mining in one speciﬁc application domain, such as stream/sensor data analysis, spatiotemporal data analysis, or bioinformatics. 1.10 Bibliographic Notes The book Knowledge Discovery in Databases, edited by Piatetsky-Shapiro and Frawley [P-SF91], is an early collection of research papers on knowledge discovery from data. The book Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, edited by Fayyad, Piatetsky-Shapiro, Smyth, and Uthurusamy [FPSS+96], is a collection of later research results on knowledge discovery and data mining. There have been many data min- ing books published in recent years, including The Elements of Statistical Learning by Hastie, Tibshirani, and Friedman [HTF09]; Introduction to Data Mining by Tan, Steinbach, and Kumar [TSK05]; Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques with Java Implementations by Witten, Frank, and Hall [WFH11]; Predic- tive Data Mining by Weiss and Indurkhya [WI98]; Mastering Data Mining: The Art and Science of Customer Relationship Management by Berry and Linoff [BL99]; Prin- ciples of Data Mining (Adaptive Computation and Machine Learning) by Hand, Mannila, and Smyth [HMS01]; Mining the Web: Discovering Knowledge from Hypertext Data by Chakrabarti [Cha03a]; Web Data Mining: Exploring Hyperlinks, Contents, and Usage 36 Chapter 1 Introduction Data by Liu [Liu06]; Data Mining: Introductory and Advanced Topics by Dunham [Dun03]; and Data Mining: Multimedia, Soft Computing, and Bioinformatics by Mitra and Acharya [MA03]. There are also books that contain collections of papers or chapters on particular aspects of knowledge discovery—for example, Relational Data Mining edited by Dze- roski and Lavrac [De01]; Mining Graph Data edited by Cook and Holder [CH07]; Data Streams: Models and Algorithms edited by Aggarwal [Agg06]; Next Generation of Data Mining edited by Kargupta, Han, Yu, et al. [KHY+08]; Multimedia Data Mining: A Sys- tematic Introduction to Concepts and Theory edited by Z. Zhang and R. Zhang [ZZ09]; Geographic Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery edited by Miller and Han [MH09]; and Link Mining: Models, Algorithms and Applications edited by Yu, Han, and Falout- sos [YHF10]. There are many tutorial notes on data mining in major databases, data mining, machine learning, statistics, and Web technology conferences. KDNuggets is a regular electronic newsletter containing information relevant to knowledge discovery and data mining, moderated by Piatetsky-Shapiro since 1991. The Internet site KDNuggets (www.kdnuggets.com) contains a good collection of KDD- related information. The data mining community started its ﬁrst international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining in 1995. The conference evolved from the four inter- national workshops on knowledge discovery in databases, held from 1989 to 1994. ACM-SIGKDD, a Special Interest Group on Knowledge Discovery in Databases was set up under ACM in 1998 and has been organizing the international conferences on knowledge discovery and data mining since 1999. IEEE Computer Science Society has organized its annual data mining conference, International Conference on Data Min- ing (ICDM), since 2001. SIAM (Society on Industrial and Applied Mathematics) has organized its annual data mining conference, SIAM Data Mining Conference (SDM), since 2002. A dedicated journal, Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, published by Kluwers Publishers, has been available since 1997. An ACM journal, ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, published its ﬁrst volume in 2007. ACM-SIGKDD also publishes a bi-annual newsletter, SIGKDD Explorations. There are a few other international or regional conferences on data mining, such as the European Conference on Machine Learning and Principles and Practice of Knowledge Discovery in Databases (ECML PKDD), the Paciﬁc-Asia Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (PAKDD), and the International Conference on Data Warehousing and Knowledge Discovery (DaWaK). Research in data mining has also been published in books, conferences, and jour- nals on databases, statistics, machine learning, and data visualization. References to such sources are listed at the end of the book. Popular textbooks on database systems include Database Systems: The Complete Book by Garcia-Molina, Ullman, and Widom [GMUW08]; Database Management Systems by Ramakrishnan and Gehrke [RG03]; Database System Concepts by Silberschatz, Korth, and Sudarshan [SKS10]; and Fundamentals of Database Systems by Elmasri and Navathe [EN10]. For an edited collection of seminal articles on database systems, see Readings in Database Systems by Hellerstein and Stonebraker [HS05]. 1.10 Bibliographic Notes 37 There are also many books on data warehouse technology, systems, and applica- tions, such as The Data Warehouse Toolkit: The Complete Guide to Dimensional Modeling by Kimball and Ross [KR02]; The Data Warehouse Lifecycle Toolkit by Kimball, Ross, Thornthwaite, and Mundy [KRTM08]; Mastering Data Warehouse Design: Relational and Dimensional Techniques by Imhoff, Galemmo, and Geiger [IGG03]; and Building the Data Warehouse by Inmon [Inm96]. A set of research papers on materialized views and data warehouse implementations were collected in Materialized Views: Techniques, Implementations, and Applications by Gupta and Mumick [GM99]. Chaudhuri and Dayal [CD97] present an early comprehensive overview of data warehouse technology. Research results relating to data mining and data warehousing have been pub- lished in the proceedings of many international database conferences, including the ACM-SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD), the International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB), the ACM SIGACT- SIGMOD-SIGART Symposium on Principles of Database Systems (PODS), the Inter- national Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE), the International Conference on Extending Database Technology (EDBT), the International Conference on Database Theory (ICDT), the International Conference on Information and Knowledge Man- agement (CIKM), the International Conference on Database and Expert Systems Appli- cations (DEXA), and the International Symposium on Database Systems for Advanced Applications (DASFAA). Research in data mining is also published in major database journals, such as IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering (TKDE), ACM Transactions on Database Systems (TODS), Information Systems, The VLDB Journal, Data and Knowledge Engineering, International Journal of Intelligent Information Systems (JIIS), and Knowledge and Information Systems (KAIS). Many effective data mining methods have been developed by statisticians and intro- duced in a rich set of textbooks. An overview of classiﬁcation from a statistical pattern recognition perspective can be found in Pattern Classiﬁcation by Duda, Hart, and Stork [DHS01]. There are also many textbooks covering regression and other topics in statis- tical analysis, such as Mathematical Statistics: Basic Ideas and Selected Topics by Bickel and Doksum [BD01]; The Statistical Sleuth: A Course in Methods of Data Analysis by Ramsey and Schafer [RS01]; Applied Linear Statistical Models by Neter, Kutner, Nacht- sheim, and Wasserman [NKNW96]; An Introduction to Generalized Linear Models by Dobson [Dob90]; Applied Statistical Time Series Analysis by Shumway [Shu88]; and Applied Multivariate Statistical Analysis by Johnson and Wichern [JW92]. Research in statistics is published in the proceedings of several major statistical con- ferences, including Joint Statistical Meetings, International Conference of the Royal Statistical Society and Symposium on the Interface: Computing Science and Statistics. Other sources of publication include the Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, The Annals of Statistics, the Journal of American Statistical Association, Technometrics, and Biometrika. Textbooks and reference books on machine learning and pattern recognition include Machine Learning by Mitchell [Mit97]; Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning by Bishop [Bis06]; Pattern Recognition by Theodoridis and Koutroumbas [TK08]; Introduc- tion to Machine Learning by Alpaydin [Alp11]; Probabilistic Graphical Models: Principles 38 Chapter 1 Introduction and Techniques by Koller and Friedman [KF09]; and Machine Learning: An Algorithmic Perspective by Marsland [Mar09]. For an edited collection of seminal articles on machine learning, see Machine Learning, An Artiﬁcial Intelligence Approach, Volumes 1 through 4, edited by Michalski et al. [MCM83, MCM86, KM90, MT94], and Readings in Machine Learning by Shavlik and Dietterich [SD90]. Machine learning and pattern recognition research is published in the proceed- ings of several major machine learning, artiﬁcial intelligence, and pattern recognition conferences, including the International Conference on Machine Learning (ML), the ACM Conference on Computational Learning Theory (COLT), the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), the International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), the International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intel- ligence (IJCAI), and the American Association of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference (AAAI). Other sources of publication include major machine learning, artiﬁcial intel- ligence, pattern recognition, and knowledge system journals, some of which have been mentioned before. Others include Machine Learning (ML), Pattern Recognition (PR), Artiﬁcial Intelligence Journal (AI), IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (PAMI), and Cognitive Science. Textbooks and reference books on information retrieval include Introduction to Information Retrieval by Manning, Raghavan, and Schutz [MRS08]; Information Retrieval: Implementing and Evaluating Search Engines by B¨uttcher, Clarke, and Cormack [BCC10]; Search Engines: Information Retrieval in Practice by Croft, Metzler, and Strohman [CMS09]; Modern Information Retrieval: The Concepts and Technology Behind Search by Baeza-Yates and Ribeiro-Neto [BYRN11]; and Information Retrieval: Algo- rithms and Heuristics by Grossman and Frieder [GR04]. Information retrieval research is published in the proceedings of several informa- tion retrieval and Web search and mining conferences, including the International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR), the International World Wide Web Conference (WWW), the ACM Interna- tional Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM), the ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM), the European Conference on Infor- mation Retrieval (ECIR), the Text Retrieval Conference (TREC), and the ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries (JCDL). Other sources of publication include major information retrieval, information systems, and Web journals, such as Journal of Information Retrieval, ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS), Informa- tion Processing and Management, Knowledge and Information Systems (KAIS), and IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering (TKDE). 2 Getting to Know Your Data It’s tempting to jump straight into mining, but ﬁrst, we need to get the data ready. This involves having a closer look at attributes and data values. Real-world data are typically noisy, enormous in volume (often several gigabytes or more), and may originate from a hodge- podge of heterogenous sources. This chapter is about getting familiar with your data. Knowledge about your data is useful for data preprocessing (see Chapter 3), the ﬁrst major task of the data mining process. You will want to know the following: What are the types of attributes or ﬁelds that make up your data? What kind of values does each attribute have? Which attributes are discrete, and which are continuous-valued? What do the data look like? How are the values distributed? Are there ways we can visualize the data to get a better sense of it all? Can we spot any outliers? Can we measure the similarity of some data objects with respect to others? Gaining such insight into the data will help with the subsequent analysis. “So what can we learn about our data that’s helpful in data preprocessing?” We begin in Section 2.1 by studying the various attribute types. These include nominal attributes, binary attributes, ordinal attributes, and numeric attributes. Basic statistical descriptions can be used to learn more about each attribute’s values, as described in Section 2.2. Given a temperature attribute, for example, we can determine its mean (average value), median (middle value), and mode (most common value). These are measures of central tendency, which give us an idea of the “middle” or center of distribution. Knowing such basic statistics regarding each attribute makes it easier to ﬁll in missing values, smooth noisy values, and spot outliers during data preprocessing. Knowledge of the attributes and attribute values can also help in ﬁxing inconsistencies incurred dur- ing data integration. Plotting the measures of central tendency shows us if the data are symmetric or skewed. Quantile plots, histograms, and scatter plots are other graphic dis- plays of basic statistical descriptions. These can all be useful during data preprocessing and can provide insight into areas for mining. The ﬁeld of data visualization provides many additional techniques for viewing data through graphical means. These can help identify relations, trends, and biases “hidden” in unstructured data sets. Techniques may be as simple as scatter-plot matrices (where c⃝2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques 39 40 Chapter 2 Getting to Know Your Data two attributes are mapped onto a 2-D grid) to more sophisticated methods such as tree- maps (where a hierarchical partitioning of the screen is displayed based on the attribute values). Data visualization techniques are described in Section 2.3. Finally, we may want to examine how similar (or dissimilar) data objects are. For example, suppose we have a database where the data objects are patients, described by their symptoms. We may want to ﬁnd the similarity or dissimilarity between individ- ual patients. Such information can allow us to ﬁnd clusters of like patients within the data set. The similarity/dissimilarity between objects may also be used to detect out- liers in the data, or to perform nearest-neighbor classiﬁcation. (Clustering is the topic of Chapters 10 and 11, while nearest-neighbor classiﬁcation is discussed in Chapter 9.) There are many measures for assessing similarity and dissimilarity. In general, such mea- sures are referred to as proximity measures. Think of the proximity of two objects as a function of the distance between their attribute values, although proximity can also be calculated based on probabilities rather than actual distance. Measures of data proximity are described in Section 2.4. In summary, by the end of this chapter, you will know the different attribute types and basic statistical measures to describe the central tendency and dispersion (spread) of attribute data. You will also know techniques to visualize attribute distributions and how to compute the similarity or dissimilarity between objects. 2.1 Data Objects and Attribute Types Data sets are made up of data objects. A data object represents an entity—in a sales database, the objects may be customers, store items, and sales; in a medical database, the objects may be patients; in a university database, the objects may be students, professors, and courses. Data objects are typically described by attributes. Data objects can also be referred to as samples, examples, instances, data points, or objects. If the data objects are stored in a database, they are data tuples. That is, the rows of a database correspond to the data objects, and the columns correspond to the attributes. In this section, we deﬁne attributes and look at the various attribute types. 2.1.1 What Is an Attribute? An attribute is a data ﬁeld, representing a characteristic or feature of a data object. The nouns attribute, dimension, feature, and variable are often used interchangeably in the literature. The term dimension is commonly used in data warehousing. Machine learning literature tends to use the term feature, while statisticians prefer the term variable. Data mining and database professionals commonly use the term attribute, and we do here as well. Attributes describing a customer object can include, for example, customer ID, name, and address. Observed values for a given attribute are known as observations. A set of attributes used to describe a given object is called an attribute vector (or feature vec- tor). The distribution of data involving one attribute (or variable) is called univariate. A bivariate distribution involves two attributes, and so on. 2.1 Data Objects and Attribute Types 41 The type of an attribute is determined by the set of possible values—nominal, binary, ordinal, or numeric—the attribute can have. In the following subsections, we introduce each type. 2.1.2 Nominal Attributes Nominal means “relating to names.” The values of a nominal attribute are symbols or names of things. Each value represents some kind of category, code, or state, and so nomi- nal attributes are also referred to as categorical. The values do not have any meaningful order. In computer science, the values are also known as enumerations. Example 2.1 Nominal attributes. Suppose that hair color and marital status are two attributes describing person objects. In our application, possible values for hair color are black, brown, blond, red, auburn, gray, and white. The attribute marital status can take on the values single, married, divorced, and widowed. Both hair color and marital status are nominal attributes. Another example of a nominal attribute is occupation, with the values teacher, dentist, programmer, farmer, and so on. Although we said that the values of a nominal attribute are symbols or “names of things,” it is possible to represent such symbols or “names” with numbers. With hair color, for instance, we can assign a code of 0 for black, 1 for brown, and so on. Another example is customor ID, with possible values that are all numeric. However, in such cases, the numbers are not intended to be used quantitatively. That is, mathe- matical operations on values of nominal attributes are not meaningful. It makes no sense to subtract one customer ID number from another, unlike, say, subtracting an age value from another (where age is a numeric attribute). Even though a nominal attribute may have integers as values, it is not considered a numeric attribute because the inte- gers are not meant to be used quantitatively. We will say more on numeric attributes in Section 2.1.5. Because nominal attribute values do not have any meaningful order about them and are not quantitative, it makes no sense to ﬁnd the mean (average) value or median (middle) value for such an attribute, given a set of objects. One thing that is of inter- est, however, is the attribute’s most commonly occurring value. This value, known as the mode, is one of the measures of central tendency. You will learn about measures of central tendency in Section 2.2. 2.1.3 Binary Attributes A binary attribute is a nominal attribute with only two categories or states: 0 or 1, where 0 typically means that the attribute is absent, and 1 means that it is present. Binary attributes are referred to as Boolean if the two states correspond to true and false. Example 2.2 Binary attributes. Given the attribute smoker describing a patient object, 1 indicates that the patient smokes, while 0 indicates that the patient does not. Similarly, suppose 42 Chapter 2 Getting to Know Your Data the patient undergoes a medical test that has two possible outcomes. The attribute medical test is binary, where a value of 1 means the result of the test for the patient is positive, while 0 means the result is negative. A binary attribute is symmetric if both of its states are equally valuable and carry the same weight; that is, there is no preference on which outcome should be coded as 0 or 1. One such example could be the attribute gender having the states male and female. A binary attribute is asymmetric if the outcomes of the states are not equally impor- tant, such as the positive and negative outcomes of a medical test for HIV. By convention, we code the most important outcome, which is usually the rarest one, by 1 (e.g., HIV positive) and the other by 0 (e.g., HIV negative). 2.1.4 Ordinal Attributes An ordinal attribute is an attribute with possible values that have a meaningful order or ranking among them, but the magnitude between successive values is not known. Example 2.3 Ordinal attributes. Suppose that drink size corresponds to the size of drinks available at a fast-food restaurant. This nominal attribute has three possible values: small, medium, and large. The values have a meaningful sequence (which corresponds to increasing drink size); however, we cannot tell from the values how much bigger, say, a medium is than a large. Other examples of ordinal attributes include grade (e.g., A+, A, A−, B+, and so on) and professional rank. Professional ranks can be enumerated in a sequential order: for example, assistant, associate, and full for professors, and private, private ﬁrst class, specialist, corporal, and sergeant for army ranks. Ordinal attributes are useful for registering subjective assessments of qualities that cannot be measured objectively; thus ordinal attributes are often used in surveys for ratings. In one survey, participants were asked to rate how satisﬁed they were as cus- tomers. Customer satisfaction had the following ordinal categories: 0: very dissatisﬁed, 1: somewhat dissatisﬁed, 2: neutral, 3: satisﬁed, and 4: very satisﬁed. Ordinal attributes may also be obtained from the discretization of numeric quantities by splitting the value range into a ﬁnite number of ordered categories as described in Chapter 3 on data reduction. The central tendency of an ordinal attribute can be represented by its mode and its median (the middle value in an ordered sequence), but the mean cannot be deﬁned. Note that nominal, binary, and ordinal attributes are qualitative. That is, they describe a feature of an object without giving an actual size or quantity. The values of such qualitative attributes are typically words representing categories. If integers are used, they represent computer codes for the categories, as opposed to measurable quantities (e.g., 0 for small drink size, 1 for medium, and 2 for large). In the following subsec- tion we look at numeric attributes, which provide quantitative measurements of an object. 2.1 Data Objects and Attribute Types 43 2.1.5 Numeric Attributes A numeric attribute is quantitative; that is, it is a measurable quantity, represented in integer or real values. Numeric attributes can be interval-scaled or ratio-scaled. Interval-Scaled Attributes Interval-scaled attributes are measured on a scale of equal-size units. The values of interval-scaled attributes have order and can be positive, 0, or negative. Thus, in addition to providing a ranking of values, such attributes allow us to compare and quantify the difference between values. Example 2.4 Interval-scaled attributes. A temperature attribute is interval-scaled. Suppose that we have the outdoor temperature value for a number of different days, where each day is an object. By ordering the values, we obtain a ranking of the objects with respect to temperature. In addition, we can quantify the difference between values. For example, a temperature of 20◦C is ﬁve degrees higher than a temperature of 15◦C. Calendar dates are another example. For instance, the years 2002 and 2010 are eight years apart. Temperatures in Celsius and Fahrenheit do not have a true zero-point, that is, neither 0◦C nor 0◦F indicates “no temperature.” (On the Celsius scale, for example, the unit of measurement is 1/100 of the difference between the melting temperature and the boiling temperature of water in atmospheric pressure.) Although we can compute the difference between temperature values, we cannot talk of one temperature value as being a multiple of another. Without a true zero, we cannot say, for instance, that 10◦C is twice as warm as 5◦C. That is, we cannot speak of the values in terms of ratios. Similarly, there is no true zero-point for calendar dates. (The year 0 does not correspond to the beginning of time.) This brings us to ratio-scaled attributes, for which a true zero-point exits. Because interval-scaled attributes are numeric, we can compute their mean value, in addition to the median and mode measures of central tendency. Ratio-Scaled Attributes A ratio-scaled attribute is a numeric attribute with an inherent zero-point. That is, if a measurement is ratio-scaled, we can speak of a value as being a multiple (or ratio) of another value. In addition, the values are ordered, and we can also compute the difference between values, as well as the mean, median, and mode. Example 2.5 Ratio-scaled attributes. Unlike temperatures in Celsius and Fahrenheit, the Kelvin (K) temperature scale has what is considered a true zero-point (0◦K = −273.15◦C): It is the point at which the particles that comprise matter have zero kinetic energy. Other examples of ratio-scaled attributes include count attributes such as years of experience (e.g., the objects are employees) and number of words (e.g., the objects are documents). Additional examples include attributes to measure weight, height, latitude and longitude 44 Chapter 2 Getting to Know Your Data coordinates (e.g., when clustering houses), and monetary quantities (e.g., you are 100 times richer with $100 than with $1). 2.1.6 Discrete versus Continuous Attributes In our presentation, we have organized attributes into nominal, binary, ordinal, and numeric types. There are many ways to organize attribute types. The types are not mutually exclusive. Classiﬁcation algorithms developed from the ﬁeld of machine learning often talk of attributes as being either discrete or continuous. Each type may be processed differently. A discrete attribute has a ﬁnite or countably inﬁnite set of values, which may or may not be represented as integers. The attributes hair color, smoker, medical test, and drink size each have a ﬁnite number of values, and so are discrete. Note that discrete attributes may have numeric values, such as 0 and 1 for binary attributes or, the values 0 to 110 for the attribute age. An attribute is countably inﬁnite if the set of possible values is inﬁnite but the values can be put in a one-to-one correspondence with natural numbers. For example, the attribute customer ID is countably inﬁnite. The number of customers can grow to inﬁnity, but in reality, the actual set of values is countable (where the values can be put in one-to-one correspondence with the set of integers). Zip codes are another example. If an attribute is not discrete, it is continuous. The terms numeric attribute and con- tinuous attribute are often used interchangeably in the literature. (This can be confusing because, in the classic sense, continuous values are real numbers, whereas numeric val- ues can be either integers or real numbers.) In practice, real values are represented using a ﬁnite number of digits. Continuous attributes are typically represented as ﬂoating-point variables. 2.2 Basic Statistical Descriptions of Data For data preprocessing to be successful, it is essential to have an overall picture of your data. Basic statistical descriptions can be used to identify properties of the data and highlight which data values should be treated as noise or outliers. This section discusses three areas of basic statistical descriptions. We start with mea- sures of central tendency (Section 2.2.1), which measure the location of the middle or center of a data distribution. Intuitively speaking, given an attribute, where do most of its values fall? In particular, we discuss the mean, median, mode, and midrange. In addition to assessing the central tendency of our data set, we also would like to have an idea of the dispersion of the data. That is, how are the data spread out? The most common data dispersion measures are the range, quartiles, and interquartile range; the ﬁve-number summary and boxplots; and the variance and standard deviation of the data These measures are useful for identifying outliers and are described in Section 2.2.2. Finally, we can use many graphic displays of basic statistical descriptions to visually inspect our data (Section 2.2.3). Most statistical or graphical data presentation software 2.2 Basic Statistical Descriptions of Data 45 packages include bar charts, pie charts, and line graphs. Other popular displays of data summaries and distributions include quantile plots, quantile–quantile plots, histograms, and scatter plots. 2.2.1 Measuring the Central Tendency: Mean, Median, and Mode In this section, we look at various ways to measure the central tendency of data. Suppose that we have some attribute X, like salary, which has been recorded for a set of objects. Let x1,x2,...,xN be the set of N observed values or observations for X. Here, these val- ues may also be referred to as the data set (for X). If we were to plot the observations for salary, where would most of the values fall? This gives us an idea of the central ten- dency of the data. Measures of central tendency include the mean, median, mode, and midrange. The most common and effective numeric measure of the “center” of a set of data is the (arithmetic) mean. Let x1,x2,...,xN be a set of N values or observations, such as for some numeric attribute X, like salary. The mean of this set of values is ¯x = N X i=1 xi N = x1 + x2 + ··· + xN N . (2.1) This corresponds to the built-in aggregate function, average (avg() in SQL), provided in relational database systems. Example 2.6 Mean. Suppose we have the following values for salary (in thousands of dollars), shown in increasing order: 30, 36, 47, 50, 52, 52, 56, 60, 63, 70, 70, 110. Using Eq. (2.1), we have ¯x = 30 + 36 + 47 + 50 + 52 + 52 + 56 + 60 + 63 + 70 + 70 + 110 12 = 696 12 = 58. Thus, the mean salary is $58,000. Sometimes, each value xi in a set may be associated with a weight wi for i = 1,...,N. The weights reﬂect the signiﬁcance, importance, or occurrence frequency attached to their respective values. In this case, we can compute ¯x = N X i=1 wixi N X i=1 wi = w1x1 + w2x2 + ··· + wNxN w1 + w2 + ··· + wN . (2.2) This is called the weighted arithmetic mean or the weighted average. 46 Chapter 2 Getting to Know Your Data Although the mean is the singlemost useful quantity for describing a data set, it is not always the best way of measuring the center of the data. A major problem with the mean is its sensitivity to extreme (e.g., outlier) values. Even a small number of extreme values can corrupt the mean. For example, the mean salary at a company may be substantially pushed up by that of a few highly paid managers. Similarly, the mean score of a class in an exam could be pulled down quite a bit by a few very low scores. To offset the effect caused by a small number of extreme values, we can instead use the trimmed mean, which is the mean obtained after chopping off values at the high and low extremes. For example, we can sort the values observed for salary and remove the top and bottom 2% before computing the mean. We should avoid trimming too large a portion (such as 20%) at both ends, as this can result in the loss of valuable information. For skewed (asymmetric) data, a better measure of the center of data is the median, which is the middle value in a set of ordered data values. It is the value that separates the higher half of a data set from the lower half. In probability and statistics, the median generally applies to numeric data; however, we may extend the concept to ordinal data. Suppose that a given data set of N values for an attribute X is sorted in increasing order. If N is odd, then the median is the middle value of the ordered set. If N is even, then the median is not unique; it is the two middlemost values and any value in between. If X is a numeric attribute in this case, by convention, the median is taken as the average of the two middlemost values. Example 2.7 Median. Let’s ﬁnd the median of the data from Example 2.6. The data are already sorted in increasing order. There is an even number of observations (i.e., 12); therefore, the median is not unique. It can be any value within the two middlemost values of 52 and 56 (that is, within the sixth and seventh values in the list). By convention, we assign the average of the two middlemost values as the median; that is, 52+56 2 = 108 2 = 54. Thus, the median is $54,000. Suppose that we had only the ﬁrst 11 values in the list. Given an odd number of values, the median is the middlemost value. This is the sixth value in this list, which has a value of $52,000. The median is expensive to compute when we have a large number of observations. For numeric attributes, however, we can easily approximate the value. Assume that data are grouped in intervals according to their xi data values and that the frequency (i.e., number of data values) of each interval is known. For example, employees may be grouped according to their annual salary in intervals such as $10–20,000, $20–30,000, and so on. Let the interval that contains the median frequency be the median inter- val. We can approximate the median of the entire data set (e.g., the median salary) by interpolation using the formula median = L1 + N/2 −  Pfreq  l freqmedian ! width, (2.3) where L1 is the lower boundary of the median interval, N is the number of values in the entire data set,  Pfreq  l is the sum of the frequencies of all of the intervals that are 2.2 Basic Statistical Descriptions of Data 47 lower than the median interval, freqmedian is the frequency of the median interval, and width is the width of the median interval. The mode is another measure of central tendency. The mode for a set of data is the value that occurs most frequently in the set. Therefore, it can be determined for qualita- tive and quantitative attributes. It is possible for the greatest frequency to correspond to several different values, which results in more than one mode. Data sets with one, two, or three modes are respectively called unimodal, bimodal, and trimodal. In general, a data set with two or more modes is multimodal. At the other extreme, if each data value occurs only once, then there is no mode. Example 2.8 Mode. The data from Example 2.6 are bimodal. The two modes are $52,000 and $70,000. For unimodal numeric data that are moderately skewed (asymmetrical), we have the following empirical relation: mean −mode ≈3 × (mean −median). (2.4) This implies that the mode for unimodal frequency curves that are moderately skewed can easily be approximated if the mean and median values are known. The midrange can also be used to assess the central tendency of a numeric data set. It is the average of the largest and smallest values in the set. This measure is easy to compute using the SQL aggregate functions, max() and min(). Example 2.9 Midrange. The midrange of the data of Example 2.6 is 30,000+110,000 2 = $70,000. In a unimodal frequency curve with perfect symmetric data distribution, the mean, median, and mode are all at the same center value, as shown in Figure 2.1(a). Data in most real applications are not symmetric. They may instead be either posi- tively skewed, where the mode occurs at a value that is smaller than the median (Figure 2.1b), or negatively skewed, where the mode occurs at a value greater than the median (Figure 2.1c). Mode Median Mean Mode Median Mean Mean Median Mode (a) Symmetric data (b) Positively skewed data (c) Negatively skewed data Figure 2.1 Mean, median, and mode of symmetric versus positively and negatively skewed data. 48 Chapter 2 Getting to Know Your Data 2.2.2 Measuring the Dispersion of Data: Range, Quartiles, Variance, Standard Deviation, and Interquartile Range We now look at measures to assess the dispersion or spread of numeric data. The mea- sures include range, quantiles, quartiles, percentiles, and the interquartile range. The ﬁve-number summary, which can be displayed as a boxplot, is useful in identifying outliers. Variance and standard deviation also indicate the spread of a data distribution. Range, Quartiles, and Interquartile Range To start off, let’s study the range, quantiles, quartiles, percentiles, and the interquartile range as measures of data dispersion. Let x1,x2,...,xN be a set of observations for some numeric attribute, X. The range of the set is the difference between the largest (max()) and smallest (min()) values. Suppose that the data for attribute X are sorted in increasing numeric order. Imagine that we can pick certain data points so as to split the data distribution into equal-size consecutive sets, as in Figure 2.2. These data points are called quantiles. Quantiles are points taken at regular intervals of a data distribution, dividing it into essentially equal- size consecutive sets. (We say “essentially” because there may not be data values of X that divide the data into exactly equal-sized subsets. For readability, we will refer to them as equal.) The kth q-quantile for a given data distribution is the value x such that at most k/q of the data values are less than x and at most (q −k)/q of the data values are more than x, where k is an integer such that 0 < k < q. There are q −1 q-quantiles. The 2-quantile is the data point dividing the lower and upper halves of the data dis- tribution. It corresponds to the median. The 4-quantiles are the three data points that split the data distribution into four equal parts; each part represents one-fourth of the data distribution. They are more commonly referred to as quartiles. The 100-quantiles are more commonly referred to as percentiles; they divide the data distribution into 100 equal-sized consecutive sets. The median, quartiles, and percentiles are the most widely used forms of quantiles. Q2 Q3 Q1 25th percentile 75th percentile Median 25% Figure 2.2 A plot of the data distribution for some attribute X. The quantiles plotted are quartiles. The three quartiles divide the distribution into four equal-size consecutive subsets. The second quartile corresponds to the median. 2.2 Basic Statistical Descriptions of Data 49 The quartiles give an indication of a distribution’s center, spread, and shape. The ﬁrst quartile, denoted by Q1, is the 25th percentile. It cuts off the lowest 25% of the data. The third quartile, denoted by Q3, is the 75th percentile—it cuts off the lowest 75% (or highest 25%) of the data. The second quartile is the 50th percentile. As the median, it gives the center of the data distribution. The distance between the ﬁrst and third quartiles is a simple measure of spread that gives the range covered by the middle half of the data. This distance is called the interquartile range (IQR) and is deﬁned as IQR = Q3 −Q1. (2.5) Example 2.10 Interquartile range. The quartiles are the three values that split the sorted data set into four equal parts. The data of Example 2.6 contain 12 observations, already sorted in increasing order. Thus, the quartiles for this data are the third, sixth, and ninth val- ues, respectively, in the sorted list. Therefore, Q1 = $47,000 and Q3 is $63,000. Thus, the interquartile range is IQR = 63 −47 = $16,000. (Note that the sixth value is a median, $52,000, although this data set has two medians since the number of data values is even.) Five-Number Summary, Boxplots, and Outliers No single numeric measure of spread (e.g., IQR) is very useful for describing skewed distributions. Have a look at the symmetric and skewed data distributions of Figure 2.1. In the symmetric distribution, the median (and other measures of central tendency) splits the data into equal-size halves. This does not occur for skewed distributions. Therefore, it is more informative to also provide the two quartiles Q1 and Q3, along with the median. A common rule of thumb for identifying suspected outliers is