classiﬁcation, where the distribution of the old data on which the clas- siﬁer was trained (the source data) is different from the newer data (the target data). TrAdaBoost assumes that the source and target domain data are each described by the same set of attributes (i.e., they have the same “feature space”) and the same set of class labels, but that the distribution of the data in the two domains is very different. It extends the AdaBoost ensemble method described in Section 8.6.3. TrAdaBoost requires the labeling of only a small amount of the target data. Rather than throwing out all the old source data, TrAdaBoost assumes that a large amount of it can be useful in training the new classiﬁcation model. The idea is to ﬁlter out the inﬂuence of any old data that are very different from the new data by automatically adjusting weights assigned to the training tuples. Recall that in boosting, an ensemble is created by learning a series of classiﬁers. To begin, each tuple is assigned a weight. After a classiﬁer Mi is learned, the weights are updated to allow the subsequent classiﬁer, Mi+1, to “pay more attention” to the training tuples that were misclassiﬁed by Mi. TrAdaBoost follows this strategy for the target data. However, if a source data tuple is misclassiﬁed, TrAdaBoost reasons that the tuple is probably very different from the target data. It therefore reduces the weight of such tuples so that they will have less effect on the subsequent classiﬁer. As a result, TrAdaBoost can learn an accurate classiﬁcation model using only a small amount of new data and a large amount of old data, even when the new data alone are insufﬁcient to train the model. Hence, in this way TrAdaBoost allows knowledge to be transferred from the old classiﬁer to the new one. A challenge with transfer learning is negative transfer, which occurs when the new classiﬁer performs worse than if there had been no transfer at all. Work on how to avoid negative transfer is an area of future research. Heterogeneous transfer learning, which involves transferring knowledge from different feature spaces and multiple source domains, is another venue for further work. Much of the research on transfer learning to date has been on small-scale applications. The use of transfer learning on larger appli- cations, such as social network analysis and video classiﬁcation, is an area for further investigation. 9.8 Summary Unlike naïve Bayesian classiﬁcation (which assumes class conditional independence), Bayesian belief networks allow class conditional independencies to be deﬁned between subsets of variables. They provide a graphical model of causal relationships, on which learning can be performed. Trained Bayesian belief networks can be used for classiﬁcation. 9.8 Summary 437 Backpropagation is a neural network algorithm for classiﬁcation that employs a method of gradient descent. It searches for a set of weights that can model the data so as to minimize the mean-squared distance between the network’s class prediction and the actual class label of data tuples. Rules may be extracted from trained neural networks to help improve the interpretability of the learned network. A support vector machine is an algorithm for the classiﬁcation of both linear and nonlinear data. It transforms the original data into a higher dimension, from where it can ﬁnd a hyperplane for data separation using essential training tuples called support vectors. Frequent patterns reﬂect strong associations between attribute–value pairs (or items) in data and are used in classiﬁcation based on frequent patterns. Approaches to this methodology include associative classiﬁcation and discriminant frequent pattern– based classiﬁcation. In associative classiﬁcation, a classiﬁer is built from association rules generated from frequent patterns. In discriminative frequent pattern–based classiﬁcation, frequent patterns serve as combined features, which are considered in addition to single features when building a classiﬁcation model. Decision tree classiﬁers, Bayesian classiﬁers, classiﬁcation by backpropagation, sup- port vector machines, and classiﬁcation based on frequent patterns are all examples of eager learners in that they use training tuples to construct a generalization model and in this way are ready for classifying new tuples. This contrasts with lazy learners or instance-based methods of classiﬁcation, such as nearest-neighbor classiﬁers and case-based reasoning classiﬁers, which store all of the training tuples in pattern space and wait until presented with a test tuple before performing generalization. Hence, lazy learners require efﬁcient indexing techniques. In genetic algorithms, populations of rules “evolve” via operations of crossover and mutation until all rules within a population satisfy a speciﬁed threshold. Rough set theory can be used to approximately deﬁne classes that are not distinguishable based on the available attributes. Fuzzy set approaches replace “brittle” threshold cutoffs for continuous-valued attributes with membership degree functions. Binary classiﬁcation schemes, such as support vector machines, can be adapted to handle multiclass classiﬁcation. This involves constructing an ensemble of binary classiﬁers. Error-correcting codes can be used to increase the accuracy of the ensemble. Semi-supervised classiﬁcation is useful when large amounts of unlabeled data exist. It builds a classiﬁer using both labeled and unlabeled data. Examples of semi-supervised classiﬁcation include self-training and cotraining. Active learning is a form of supervised learning that is also suitable for situations where data are abundant, yet the class labels are scarce or expensive to obtain. The learning algorithm can actively query a user (e.g., a human oracle) for labels. To keep costs down, the active learner aims to achieve high accuracy using as few labeled instances as possible. 438 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods Transfer learning aims to extract the knowledge from one or more source tasks and apply the knowledge to a target task. TrAdaBoost is an example of the instance-based approach to transfer learning, which reweights some of the data from the source task and uses it to learn the target task, thereby requiring fewer labeled target-task tuples. 9.9 Exercises 9.1 The following table consists of training data from an employee database. The data have been generalized. For example, “31 ... 35” for age represents the age range of 31 to 35. For a given row entry, count represents the number of data tuples having the values for department, status, age, and salary given in that row. department status age salary count sales senior 31 ... 35 46K ... 50K 30 sales junior 26 ... 30 26K ... 30K 40 sales junior 31 ... 35 31K ... 35K 40 systems junior 21 ... 25 46K ... 50K 20 systems senior 31 ... 35 66K ... 70K 5 systems junior 26 ... 30 46K ... 50K 3 systems senior 41 ... 45 66K ... 70K 3 marketing senior 36 ... 40 46K ... 50K 10 marketing junior 31 ... 35 41K ... 45K 4 secretary senior 46 ... 50 36K ... 40K 4 secretary junior 26 ... 30 26K ... 30K 6 Let status be the class-label attribute. (a) Design a multilayer feed-forward neural network for the given data. Label the nodes in the input and output layers. (b) Using the multilayer feed-forward neural network obtained in (a), show the weight values after one iteration of the backpropagation algorithm, given the training instance “(sales, senior, 31 ...35, 46K ...50K)”. Indicate your initial weight values and biases and the learning rate used. 9.2 The support vector machine is a highly accurate classiﬁcation method. However, SVM classiﬁers suffer from slow processing when training with a large set of data tuples. Dis- cuss how to overcome this difﬁculty and develop a scalable SVM algorithm for efﬁcient SVM classiﬁcation in large data sets. 9.3 Compare and contrast associative classiﬁcation and discriminative frequent pattern–based classiﬁcation. Why is classiﬁcation based on frequent patterns able to achieve higher classiﬁcation accuracy in many cases than a classic decision tree method? 9.10 Bibliographic Notes 439 9.4 Compare the advantages and disadvantages of eager classiﬁcation (e.g., decision tree, Bayesian, neural network) versus lazy classiﬁcation (e.g., k-nearest neighbor, case-based reasoning). 9.5 Write an algorithm for k-nearest-neighbor classiﬁcation given k, the nearest number of neighbors, and n, the number of attributes describing each tuple. 9.6 Brieﬂy describe the classiﬁcation processes using (a) genetic algorithms, (b) rough sets, and (c) fuzzy sets. 9.7 Example 9.3 showed a use of error-correcting codes for a multiclass classiﬁcation problem having four classes. (a) Suppose that, given an unknown tuple to label, the seven trained binary classiﬁers collectively output the codeword 0101110, which does not match a codeword for any of the four classes. Using error correction, what class label should be assigned to the tuple? (b) Explain why using a 4-bit vector for the codewords is insufﬁcient for error correction. 9.8 Semi-supervised classiﬁcation, active learning, and transfer learning are useful for situa- tions in which unlabeled data are abundant. (a) Describe semi-supervised classiﬁcation, active learning, and transfer learning. Elab- orate on applications for which they are useful, as well as the challenges of these approaches to classiﬁcation. (b) Research and describe an approach to semi-supervised classiﬁcation other than self- training and cotraining. (c) Research and describe an approach to active learning other than pool-based learning. (d) Research and describe an alternative approach to instance-based transfer learning. 9.10 Bibliographic Notes For an introduction to Bayesian belief networks, see Darwiche [Dar10] and Heckerman [Hec96]. For a thorough presentation of probabilistic networks, see Pearl [Pea88] and Koller and Friedman [KF09]. Solutions for learning the belief network structure from training data given observable variables are proposed in Cooper and Herskovits [CH92]; Buntine [Bun94]; and Heckerman, Geiger, and Chickering [HGC95]. Algo- rithms for inference on belief networks can be found in Russell and Norvig [RN95] and Jensen [Jen96]. The method of gradient descent, described in Section 9.1.2, for training Bayesian belief networks, is given in Russell, Binder, Koller, and Kanazawa [RBKK95]. The example given in Figure 9.1 is adapted from Russell et al. [RBKK95]. Alternative strategies for learning belief networks with hidden variables include application of Dempster, Laird, and Rubin’s [DLR77] EM (Expectation Maximization) algorithm (Lauritzen [Lau95]) and methods based on the minimum description length 440 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods principle (Lam [Lam98]). Cooper [Coo90] showed that the general problem of infer- ence in unconstrained belief networks is NP-hard. Limitations of belief networks, such as their large computational complexity (Laskey and Mahoney [LM97]), have prompted the exploration of hierarchical and composable Bayesian models (Pfeffer, Koller, Milch, and Takusagawa [PKMT99] and Xiang, Olesen, and Jensen [XOJ00]). These follow an object-oriented approach to knowledge representation. Fishelson and Geiger [FG02] present a Bayesian network for genetic linkage analysis. The perceptron is a simple neural network, proposed in 1958 by Rosenblatt [Ros58], which became a landmark in early machine learning history. Its input units are ran- domly connected to a single layer of output linear threshold units. In 1969, Minsky and Papert [MP69] showed that perceptrons are incapable of learning concepts that are linearly inseparable. This limitation, as well as limitations on hardware at the time, dampened enthusiasm for research in computational neuronal modeling for nearly 20 years. Renewed interest was sparked following the presentation of the backpropaga- tion algorithm in 1986 by Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams [RHW86], as this algorithm can learn concepts that are linearly inseparable. Since then, many variations of backpropagation have been proposed, involving, for example, alternative error functions (Hanson and Burr [HB87]); dynamic adjustment of the network topology (M´ezard and Nadal [MN89]; Fahlman and Lebiere [FL90]; Le Cun, Denker, and Solla [LDS90]; and Harp, Samad, and Guha [HSG90]); and dynamic adjustment of the learning rate and momentum parameters (Jacobs [Jac88]). Other variations are discussed in Chauvin and Rumelhart [CR95]. Books on neural networks include Rumelhart and McClelland [RM86]; Hecht-Nielsen [HN90]; Hertz, Krogh, and Palmer [HKP91]; Chauvin and Rumelhart [CR95]; Bishop [Bis95]; Ripley [Rip96]; and Haykin [Hay99]. Many books on machine learning, such as Mitchell [Mit97] and Russell and Norvig [RN95], also contain good explanations of the backpropagation algorithm. There are several techniques for extracting rules from neural networks, such as those found in these papers: [SN88, Gal93, TS93, Avn95, LSL95, CS96, LGT97]. The method of rule extraction described in Section 9.2.4 is based on Lu, Setiono, and Liu [LSL95]. Critiques of techniques for rule extraction from neural networks can be found in Craven and Shavlik [CS97]. Roy [Roy00] proposes that the theoretical foundations of neural networks are ﬂawed with respect to assumptions made regarding how connectionist learning models the brain. An extensive survey of applications of neural networks in industry, business, and science is provided in Widrow, Rumelhart, and Lehr [WRL94]. Support Vector Machines (SVMs) grew out of early work by Vapnik and Chervonenkis on statistical learning theory [VC71]. The ﬁrst paper on SVMs was presented by Boser, Guyon, and Vapnik [BGV92]. More detailed accounts can be found in books by Vapnik [Vap95, Vap98]. Good starting points include the tuto- rial on SVMs by Burges [Bur98], as well as textbook coverage by Haykin [Hay08], Kecman [Kec01], and Cristianini and Shawe-Taylor [CS-T00]. For methods for solving optimization problems, see Fletcher [Fle87] and Nocedal and Wright [NW99]. These references give additional details alluded to as “fancy math tricks” in our text, such as transformation of the problem to a Lagrangian formulation and subsequent solving using Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions. 9.10 Bibliographic Notes 441 For the application of SVMs to regression, see Sch¨olkopf, Bartlett, Smola, and Williamson [SBSW99] and Drucker, Burges, Kaufman, Smola, and Vapnik [DBK+97]. Approaches to SVM for large data include the sequential minimal optimization algo- rithm by Platt [Pla98], decomposition approaches such as in Osuna, Freund, and Girosi [OFG97], and CB-SVM, a microclustering-based SVM algorithm for large data sets, by Yu, Yang, and Han [YYH03]. A library of software for support vector machines is provided by Chang and Lin at www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/∼cjlin/libsvm/, which supports multiclass classiﬁcation. Many algorithms have been proposed that adapt frequent pattern mining to the task of classiﬁcation. Early studies on associative classiﬁcation include the CBA algorithm, proposed in Liu, Hsu, and Ma [LHM98]. A classiﬁer that uses emerging patterns (item- sets with support that varies signiﬁcantly from one data set to another) is proposed in Dong and Li [DL99] and Li, Dong, and Ramamohanarao [LDR00]. CMAR is pre- sented in Li, Han, and Pei [LHP01]. CPAR is presented in Yin and Han [YH03b]. Cong, Tan, Tung, and Xu describe RCBT, a method for mining top-k covering rule groups for classifying high-dimensional gene expression data with high accuracy [CTTX05]. Wang and Karypis [WK05] present HARMONY (Highest conﬁdence classiﬁcAtion Rule Mining fOr iNstance-centric classifYing), which directly mines the ﬁnal classiﬁ- cation rule set with the aid of pruning strategies. Lent, Swami, and Widom [LSW97] propose the ARCS system regarding mining multidimensional association rules. It com- bines ideas from association rule mining, clustering, and image processing, and applies them to classiﬁcation. Meretakis and W¨uthrich [MW99] propose constructing a na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁer by mining long itemsets. Veloso, Meira, and Zaki [VMZ06] propose an association rule–based classiﬁcation method based on a lazy (noneager) learning approach, in which the computation is performed on a demand-driven basis. Studies on discriminative frequent pattern–based classiﬁcation were conducted by Cheng, Yan, Han, and Hsu [CYHH07] and Cheng, Yan, Han, and Yu [CYHY08]. The former work establishes a theoretical upper bound on the discriminative power of fre- quent patterns (based on either information gain [Qui86] or Fisher score [DHS01]), which can be used as a strategy for setting minimum support. The latter work describes the DDPMine algorithm, which is a direct approach to mining discriminative frequent patterns for classiﬁcation in that it avoids generating the complete frequent pattern set. H. Kim, S. Kim, Weninger, et al. proposed an NDPMine algorithm that performs fre- quent and discriminative pattern–based classiﬁcation by taking repetitive features into consideration [KKW+10]. Nearest-neighbor classiﬁers were introduced in 1951 by Fix and Hodges [FH51]. A comprehensive collection of articles on nearest-neighbor classiﬁcation can be found in Dasarathy [Das91]. Additional references can be found in many texts on classiﬁca- tion, such as Duda, Hart, and Stork [DHS01] and James [Jam85], as well as articles by Cover and Hart [CH67] and Fukunaga and Hummels [FH87]. Their integration with attribute weighting and the pruning of noisy instances is described in Aha [Aha92]. The use of search trees to improve nearest-neighbor classiﬁcation time is detailed in Friedman, Bentley, and Finkel [FBF77]. The partial distance method was proposed by researchers in vector quantization and compression. It is outlined in Gersho and Gray 442 Chapter 9 Classiﬁcation: Advanced Methods [GG92]. The editing method for removing “useless” training tuples was ﬁrst proposed by Hart [Har68]. The computational complexity of nearest-neighbor classiﬁers is described in Preparata and Shamos [PS85]. References on case-based reasoning include the texts by Riesbeck and Schank [RS89] and Kolodner [Kol93], as well as Leake [Lea96] and Aamodt and Plazas [AP94]. For a list of business applications, see Allen [All94]. Exam- ples in medicine include CASEY by Koton [Kot88] and PROTOS by Bareiss, Porter, and Weir [BPW88], while Rissland and Ashley [RA87] is an example of CBR for law. CBR is available in several commercial software products. For texts on genetic algorithms, see Goldberg [Gol89], Michalewicz [Mic92], and Mitchell [Mit96]. Rough sets were introduced in Pawlak [Paw91]. Concise summaries of rough set the- ory in data mining include Ziarko [Zia91] and Cios, Pedrycz, and Swiniarski [CPS98]. Rough sets have been used for feature reduction and expert system design in many applications, including Ziarko [Zia91], Lenarcik and Piasta [LP97], and Swiniarski [Swi98]. Algorithms to reduce the computation intensity in ﬁnding reducts have been proposed in Skowron and Rauszer [SR92]. Fuzzy set theory was proposed by Zadeh [Zad65, Zad83]. Additional descriptions can be found in Yager and Zadeh [YZ94] and Kecman [Kec01]. Work on multiclass classiﬁcation is described in Hastie and Tibshirani [HT98], Tax and Duin [TD02], and Allwein, Shapire, and Singer [ASS00]. Zhu [Zhu05] presents a comprehensive survey on semi-supervised classiﬁcation. For additional references, see the book edited by Chapelle, Sch¨olkopf, and Zien [CSZ06]. Dietterich and Bakiri [DB95] propose the use of error-correcting codes for multiclass classiﬁcation. For a survey on active learning, see Settles [Set10]. Pan and Yang present a survey on transfer learning [PY10]. The TrAdaBoost boosting algorithm for transfer learning is given in Dai, Yang, Xue, and Yu [DYXY07]. 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods Imagine that you are the Director of Customer Relationships at AllElectronics, and you have ﬁve managers working for you. You would like to organize all the company’s customers into ﬁve groups so that each group can be assigned to a different manager. Strategically, you would like that the customers in each group are as similar as possible. Moreover, two given customers having very different business patterns should not be placed in the same group. Your intention behind this business strategy is to develop customer relationship campaigns that speciﬁcally target each group, based on common features shared by the customers per group. What kind of data mining techniques can help you to accomplish this task? Unlike in classiﬁcation, the class label (or group ID) of each customer is unknown. You need to discover these groupings. Given a large number of customers and many attributes describing customer proﬁles, it can be very costly or even infeasible to have a human study the data and manually come up with a way to partition the customers into strategic groups. You need a clustering tool to help. Clustering is the process of grouping a set of data objects into multiple groups or clus- ters so that objects within a cluster have high similarity, but are very dissimilar to objects in other clusters. Dissimilarities and similarities are assessed based on the attribute val- ues describing the objects and often involve distance measures.1 Clustering as a data mining tool has its roots in many application areas such as biology, security, business intelligence, and Web search. This chapter presents the basic concepts and methods of cluster analysis. In Section 10.1, we introduce the topic and study the requirements of clustering meth- ods for massive amounts of data and various applications. You will learn several basic clustering techniques, organized into the following categories: partitioning methods (Section 10.2), hierarchical methods (Section 10.3), density-based methods (Section 10.4), and grid-based methods (Section 10.5). In Section 10.6, we brieﬂy discuss how to evaluate 1Data similarity and dissimilarity are discussed in detail in Section 2.4. You may want to refer to that section for a quick review. c⃝2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques 443 444 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods clustering methods. A discussion of advanced methods of clustering is reserved for Chapter 11. 10.1 Cluster Analysis This section sets up the groundwork for studying cluster analysis. Section 10.1.1 deﬁnes cluster analysis and presents examples of where it is useful. In Section 10.1.2, you will learn aspects for comparing clustering methods, as well as requirements for clustering. An overview of basic clustering techniques is presented in Section 10.1.3. 10.1.1 What Is Cluster Analysis? Cluster analysis or simply clustering is the process of partitioning a set of data objects (or observations) into subsets. Each subset is a cluster, such that objects in a cluster are similar to one another, yet dissimilar to objects in other clusters. The set of clusters resulting from a cluster analysis can be referred to as a clustering. In this context, dif- ferent clustering methods may generate different clusterings on the same data set. The partitioning is not performed by humans, but by the clustering algorithm. Hence, clus- tering is useful in that it can lead to the discovery of previously unknown groups within the data. Cluster analysis has been widely used in many applications such as business intel- ligence, image pattern recognition, Web search, biology, and security. In business intelligence, clustering can be used to organize a large number of customers into groups, where customers within a group share strong similar characteristics. This facilitates the development of business strategies for enhanced customer relationship management. Moreover, consider a consultant company with a large number of projects. To improve project management, clustering can be applied to partition projects into categories based on similarity so that project auditing and diagnosis (to improve project delivery and outcomes) can be conducted effectively. In image recognition, clustering can be used to discover clusters or “subclasses” in handwritten character recognition systems. Suppose we have a data set of handwritten digits, where each digit is labeled as either 1, 2, 3, and so on. Note that there can be a large variance in the way in which people write the same digit. Take the number 2, for example. Some people may write it with a small circle at the left bottom part, while some others may not. We can use clustering to determine subclasses for “2,” each of which represents a variation on the way in which 2 can be written. Using multiple models based on the subclasses can improve overall recognition accuracy. Clustering has also found many applications in Web search. For example, a keyword search may often return a very large number of hits (i.e., pages relevant to the search) due to the extremely large number of web pages. Clustering can be used to organize the search results into groups and present the results in a concise and easily accessible way. Moreover, clustering techniques have been developed to cluster documents into topics, which are commonly used in information retrieval practice. 10.1 Cluster Analysis 445 As a data mining function, cluster analysis can be used as a standalone tool to gain insight into the distribution of data, to observe the characteristics of each cluster, and to focus on a particular set of clusters for further analysis. Alternatively, it may serve as a preprocessing step for other algorithms, such as characterization, attribute subset selection, and classiﬁcation, which would then operate on the detected clusters and the selected attributes or features. Because a cluster is a collection of data objects that are similar to one another within the cluster and dissimilar to objects in other clusters, a cluster of data objects can be treated as an implicit class. In this sense, clustering is sometimes called automatic clas- siﬁcation. Again, a critical difference here is that clustering can automatically ﬁnd the groupings. This is a distinct advantage of cluster analysis. Clustering is also called data segmentation in some applications because cluster- ing partitions large data sets into groups according to their similarity. Clustering can also be used for outlier detection, where outliers (values that are “far away” from any cluster) may be more interesting than common cases. Applications of outlier detection include the detection of credit card fraud and the monitoring of criminal activities in electronic commerce. For example, exceptional cases in credit card transactions, such as very expensive and infrequent purchases, may be of interest as possible fraudulent activities. Outlier detection is the subject of Chapter 12. Data clustering is under vigorous development. Contributing areas of research include data mining, statistics, machine learning, spatial database technology, informa- tion retrieval, Web search, biology, marketing, and many other application areas. Owing to the huge amounts of data collected in databases, cluster analysis has recently become a highly active topic in data mining research. As a branch of statistics, cluster analysis has been extensively studied, with the main focus on distance-based cluster analysis. Cluster analysis tools based on k-means, k-medoids, and several other methods also have been built into many statistical analysis software packages or systems, such as S-Plus, SPSS, and SAS. In machine learning, recall that classiﬁcation is known as supervised learning because the class label information is given, that is, the learning algorithm is supervised in that it is told the class member- ship of each training tuple. Clustering is known as unsupervised learning because the class label information is not present. For this reason, clustering is a form of learning by observation, rather than learning by examples. In data mining, efforts have focused on ﬁnding methods for efﬁcient and effective cluster analysis in large databases. Active themes of research focus on the scalability of clustering methods, the effectiveness of methods for clustering complex shapes (e.g., nonconvex) and types of data (e.g., text, graphs, and images), high-dimensional clustering techniques (e.g., clustering objects with thousands of features), and methods for clustering mixed numerical and nominal data in large databases. 10.1.2 Requirements for Cluster Analysis Clustering is a challenging research ﬁeld. In this section, you will learn about the require- ments for clustering as a data mining tool, as well as aspects that can be used for comparing clustering methods. 446 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods The following are typical requirements of clustering in data mining. Scalability: Many clustering algorithms work well on small data sets containing fewer than several hundred data objects; however, a large database may contain millions or even billions of objects, particularly in Web search scenarios. Clustering on only a sample of a given large data set may lead to biased results. Therefore, highly scalable clustering algorithms are needed. Ability to deal with different types of attributes: Many algorithms are designed to cluster numeric (interval-based) data. However, applications may require clustering other data types, such as binary, nominal (categorical), and ordinal data, or mixtures of these data types. Recently, more and more applications need clustering techniques for complex data types such as graphs, sequences, images, and documents. Discovery of clusters with arbitrary shape: Many clustering algorithms determine clusters based on Euclidean or Manhattan distance measures (Chapter 2). Algorithms based on such distance measures tend to ﬁnd spherical clusters with similar size and density. However, a cluster could be of any shape. Consider sensors, for example, which are often deployed for environment surveillance. Cluster analysis on sensor readings can detect interesting phenomena. We may want to use clustering to ﬁnd the frontier of a running forest ﬁre, which is often not spherical. It is important to develop algorithms that can detect clusters of arbitrary shape. Requirements for domain knowledge to determine input parameters: Many clus- tering algorithms require users to provide domain knowledge in the form of input parameters such as the desired number of clusters. Consequently, the clustering results may be sensitive to such parameters. Parameters are often hard to determine, especially for high-dimensionality data sets and where users have yet to grasp a deep understanding of their data. Requiring the speciﬁcation of domain knowledge not only burdens users, but also makes the quality of clustering difﬁcult to control. Ability to deal with noisy data: Most real-world data sets contain outliers and/or missing, unknown, or erroneous data. Sensor readings, for example, are often noisy—some readings may be inaccurate due to the sensing mechanisms, and some readings may be erroneous due to interferences from surrounding transient objects. Clustering algorithms can be sensitive to such noise and may produce poor-quality clusters. Therefore, we need clustering methods that are robust to noise. Incremental clustering and insensitivity to input order: In many applications, incremental updates (representing newer data) may arrive at any time. Some clus- tering algorithms cannot incorporate incremental updates into existing clustering structures and, instead, have to recompute a new clustering from scratch. Cluster- ing algorithms may also be sensitive to the input data order. That is, given a set of data objects, clustering algorithms may return dramatically different clusterings depending on the order in which the objects are presented. Incremental clustering algorithms and algorithms that are insensitive to the input order are needed. 10.1 Cluster Analysis 447 Capability of clustering high-dimensionality data: A data set can contain numerous dimensions or attributes. When clustering documents, for example, each keyword can be regarded as a dimension, and there are often thousands of keywords. Most clustering algorithms are good at handling low-dimensional data such as data sets involving only two or three dimensions. Finding clusters of data objects in a high- dimensional space is challenging, especially considering that such data can be very sparse and highly skewed. Constraint-based clustering: Real-world applications may need to perform clus- tering under various kinds of constraints. Suppose that your job is to choose the locations for a given number of new automatic teller machines (ATMs) in a city. To decide upon this, you may cluster households while considering constraints such as the city’s rivers and highway networks and the types and number of customers per cluster. A challenging task is to ﬁnd data groups with good clustering behavior that satisfy speciﬁed constraints. Interpretability and usability: Users want clustering results to be interpretable, comprehensible, and usable. That is, clustering may need to be tied in with spe- ciﬁc semantic interpretations and applications. It is important to study how an application goal may inﬂuence the selection of clustering features and clustering methods. The following are orthogonal aspects with which clustering methods can be compared: The partitioning criteria: In some methods, all the objects are partitioned so that no hierarchy exists among the clusters. That is, all the clusters are at the same level conceptually. Such a method is useful, for example, for partitioning customers into groups so that each group has its own manager. Alternatively, other methods parti- tion data objects hierarchically, where clusters can be formed at different semantic levels. For example, in text mining, we may want to organize a corpus of documents into multiple general topics, such as “politics” and “sports,” each of which may have subtopics, For instance, “football,” “basketball,” “baseball,” and “hockey” can exist as subtopics of “sports.” The latter four subtopics are at a lower level in the hierarchy than “sports.” Separation of clusters: Some methods partition data objects into mutually exclusive clusters. When clustering customers into groups so that each group is taken care of by one manager, each customer may belong to only one group. In some other situations, the clusters may not be exclusive, that is, a data object may belong to more than one cluster. For example, when clustering documents into topics, a document may be related to multiple topics. Thus, the topics as clusters may not be exclusive. Similarity measure: Some methods determine the similarity between two objects by the distance between them. Such a distance can be deﬁned on Euclidean space, 448 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods a road network, a vector space, or any other space. In other methods, the similarity may be deﬁned by connectivity based on density or contiguity, and may not rely on the absolute distance between two objects. Similarity measures play a fundamental role in the design of clustering methods. While distance-based methods can often take advantage of optimization techniques, density- and continuity-based methods can often ﬁnd clusters of arbitrary shape. Clustering space: Many clustering methods search for clusters within the entire given data space. These methods are useful for low-dimensionality data sets. With high- dimensional data, however, there can be many irrelevant attributes, which can make similarity measurements unreliable. Consequently, clusters found in the full space are often meaningless. It’s often better to instead search for clusters within different subspaces of the same data set. Subspace clustering discovers clusters and subspaces (often of low dimensionality) that manifest object similarity. To conclude, clustering algorithms have several requirements. These factors include scalability and the ability to deal with different types of attributes, noisy data, incremen- tal updates, clusters of arbitrary shape, and constraints. Interpretability and usability are also important. In addition, clustering methods can differ with respect to the partition- ing level, whether or not clusters are mutually exclusive, the similarity measures used, and whether or not subspace clustering is performed. 10.1.3 Overview of Basic Clustering Methods There are many clustering algorithms in the literature. It is difﬁcult to provide a crisp categorization of clustering methods because these categories may overlap so that a method may have features from several categories. Nevertheless, it is useful to present a relatively organized picture of clustering methods. In general, the major fundamental clustering methods can be classiﬁed into the following categories, which are discussed in the rest of this chapter. Partitioning methods: Given a set of n objects, a partitioning method constructs k partitions of the data, where each partition represents a cluster and k ≤n. That is, it divides the data into k groups such that each group must contain at least one object. In other words, partitioning methods conduct one-level partitioning on data sets. The basic partitioning methods typically adopt exclusive cluster separation. That is, each object must belong to exactly one group. This requirement may be relaxed, for example, in fuzzy partitioning techniques. References to such techniques are given in the bibliographic notes (Section 10.9). Most partitioning methods are distance-based. Given k, the number of partitions to construct, a partitioning method creates an initial partitioning. It then uses an iterative relocation technique that attempts to improve the partitioning by moving objects from one group to another. The general criterion of a good partitioning is that objects in the same cluster are “close” or related to each other, whereas objects in different clusters are “far apart” or very different. There are various kinds of other 10.1 Cluster Analysis 449 criteria for judging the quality of partitions. Traditional partitioning methods can be extended for subspace clustering, rather than searching the full data space. This is useful when there are many attributes and the data are sparse. Achieving global optimality in partitioning-based clustering is often computation- ally prohibitive, potentially requiring an exhaustive enumeration of all the possible partitions. Instead, most applications adopt popular heuristic methods, such as greedy approaches like the k-means and the k-medoids algorithms, which progres- sively improve the clustering quality and approach a local optimum. These heuristic clustering methods work well for ﬁnding spherical-shaped clusters in small- to medium-size databases. To ﬁnd clusters with complex shapes and for very large data sets, partitioning-based methods need to be extended. Partitioning-based clustering methods are studied in depth in Section 10.2. Hierarchical methods: A hierarchical method creates a hierarchical decomposition of the given set of data objects. A hierarchical method can be classiﬁed as being either agglomerative or divisive, based on how the hierarchical decomposition is formed. The agglomerative approach, also called the bottom-up approach, starts with each object forming a separate group. It successively merges the objects or groups close to one another, until all the groups are merged into one (the topmost level of the hierarchy), or a termination condition holds. The divisive approach, also called the top-down approach, starts with all the objects in the same cluster. In each successive iteration, a cluster is split into smaller clusters, until eventually each object is in one cluster, or a termination condition holds. Hierarchical clustering methods can be distance-based or density- and continuity- based. Various extensions of hierarchical methods consider clustering in subspaces as well. Hierarchical methods suffer from the fact that once a step (merge or split) is done, it can never be undone. This rigidity is useful in that it leads to smaller computa- tion costs by not having to worry about a combinatorial number of different choices. Such techniques cannot correct erroneous decisions; however, methods for improv- ing the quality of hierarchical clustering have been proposed. Hierarchical clustering methods are studied in Section 10.3. Density-based methods: Most partitioning methods cluster objects based on the dis- tance between objects. Such methods can ﬁnd only spherical-shaped clusters and encounter difﬁculty in discovering clusters of arbitrary shapes. Other clustering methods have been developed based on the notion of density. Their general idea is to continue growing a given cluster as long as the density (number of objects or data points) in the “neighborhood” exceeds some threshold. For example, for each data point within a given cluster, the neighborhood of a given radius has to contain at least a minimum number of points. Such a method can be used to ﬁlter out noise or outliers and discover clusters of arbitrary shape. Density-based methods can divide a set of objects into multiple exclusive clus- ters, or a hierarchy of clusters. Typically, density-based methods consider exclusive clusters only, and do not consider fuzzy clusters. Moreover, density-based methods can be extended from full space to subspace clustering. Density-based clustering methods are studied in Section 10.4. 450 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods Grid-based methods: Grid-based methods quantize the object space into a ﬁnite number of cells that form a grid structure. All the clustering operations are per- formed on the grid structure (i.e., on the quantized space). The main advantage of this approach is its fast processing time, which is typically independent of the num- ber of data objects and dependent only on the number of cells in each dimension in the quantized space. Using grids is often an efﬁcient approach to many spatial data mining problems, including clustering. Therefore, grid-based methods can be integrated with other clustering methods such as density-based methods and hierarchical methods. Grid- based clustering is studied in Section 10.5. These methods are brieﬂy summarized in Figure 10.1. Some clustering algorithms integrate the ideas of several clustering methods, so that it is sometimes difﬁcult to clas- sify a given algorithm as uniquely belonging to only one clustering method category. Furthermore, some applications may have clustering criteria that require the integration of several clustering techniques. In the following sections, we examine each clustering method in detail. Advanced clustering methods and related issues are discussed in Chapter 11. In general, the notation used is as follows. Let D be a data set of n objects to be clustered. An object is described by d variables, where each variable is also called an attribute or a dimension, Method General Characteristics Partitioning methods – Find mutually exclusive clusters of spherical shape – Distance-based – May use mean or medoid (etc.) to represent cluster center – Effective for small- to medium-size data sets Hierarchical methods – Clustering is a hierarchical decomposition (i.e., multiple levels) – Cannot correct erroneous merges or splits – May incorporate other techniques like microclustering or consider object “linkages” Density-based methods – Can ﬁnd arbitrarily shaped clusters – Clusters are dense regions of objects in space that are separated by low-density regions – Cluster density: Each point must have a minimum number of points within its “neighborhood” – May ﬁlter out outliers Grid-based methods – Use a multiresolution grid data structure – Fast processing time (typically independent of the number of data objects, yet dependent on grid size) Figure 10.1 Overview of clustering methods discussed in this chapter. Note that some algorithms may combine various methods. 10.2 Partitioning Methods 451 and therefore may also be referred to as a point in a d-dimensional object space. Objects are represented in bold italic font (e.g., p). 10.2 Partitioning Methods The simplest and most fundamental version of cluster analysis is partitioning, which organizes the objects of a set into several exclusive groups or clusters. To keep the problem speciﬁcation concise, we can assume that the number of clusters is given as background knowledge. This parameter is the starting point for partitioning methods. Formally, given a data set, D, of n objects, and k, the number of clusters to form, a partitioning algorithm organizes the objects into k partitions (k ≤n), where each par- tition represents a cluster. The clusters are formed to optimize an objective partitioning criterion, such as a dissimilarity function based on distance, so that the objects within a cluster are “similar” to one another and “dissimilar” to objects in other clusters in terms of the data set attributes. In this section you will learn the most well-known and commonly used partitioning methods—k-means (Section 10.2.1) and k-medoids (Section 10.2.2). You will also learn several variations of these classic partitioning methods and how they can be scaled up to handle large data sets. 10.2.1 k-Means: A Centroid-Based Technique Suppose a data set, D, contains n objects in Euclidean space. Partitioning methods dis- tribute the objects in D into k clusters, C1,...,Ck, that is, Ci ⊂D and Ci ∩Cj = ∅for (1 ≤i,j ≤k). An objective function is used to assess the partitioning quality so that objects within a cluster are similar to one another but dissimilar to objects in other clusters. This is, the objective function aims for high intracluster similarity and low intercluster similarity. A centroid-based partitioning technique uses the centroid of a cluster, Ci, to represent that cluster. Conceptually, the centroid of a cluster is its center point. The centroid can be deﬁned in various ways such as by the mean or medoid of the objects (or points) assigned to the cluster. The difference between an object p ∈Ci and ci, the representa- tive of the cluster, is measured by dist(p,ci), where dist(x,y) is the Euclidean distance between two points x and y. The quality of cluster Ci can be measured by the within- cluster variation, which is the sum of squared error between all objects in Ci and the centroid ci, deﬁned as E = k X i=1 X p∈Ci dist(p,ci)2, (10.1) where E is the sum of the squared error for all objects in the data set; p is the point in space representing a given object; and ci is the centroid of cluster Ci (both p and ci are multidimensional). In other words, for each object in each cluster, the distance from 452 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods the object to its cluster center is squared, and the distances are summed. This objective function tries to make the resulting k clusters as compact and as separate as possible. Optimizing the within-cluster variation is computationally challenging. In the worst case, we would have to enumerate a number of possible partitionings that are exponen- tial to the number of clusters, and check the within-cluster variation values. It has been shown that the problem is NP-hard in general Euclidean space even for two clusters (i.e., k = 2). Moreover, the problem is NP-hard for a general number of clusters k even in the 2-D Euclidean space. If the number of clusters k and the dimensionality of the space d are ﬁxed, the problem can be solved in time O(ndk+1 logn), where n is the number of objects. To overcome the prohibitive computational cost for the exact solution, greedy approaches are often used in practice. A prime example is the k-means algorithm, which is simple and commonly used. “How does the k-means algorithm work?” The k-means algorithm deﬁnes the centroid of a cluster as the mean value of the points within the cluster. It proceeds as follows. First, it randomly selects k of the objects in D, each of which initially represents a cluster mean or center. For each of the remaining objects, an object is assigned to the cluster to which it is the most similar, based on the Euclidean distance between the object and the cluster mean. The k-means algorithm then iteratively improves the within-cluster variation. For each cluster, it computes the new mean using the objects assigned to the cluster in the previous iteration. All the objects are then reassigned using the updated means as the new cluster centers. The iterations continue until the assignment is stable, that is, the clusters formed in the current round are the same as those formed in the previous round. The k-means procedure is summarized in Figure 10.2. Algorithm: k-means. The k-means algorithm for partitioning, where each cluster’s center is represented by the mean value of the objects in the cluster. Input: k: the number of clusters, D: a data set containing n objects. Output: A set of k clusters. Method: (1) arbitrarily choose k objects from D as the initial cluster centers; (2) repeat (3) (re)assign each object to the cluster to which the object is the most similar, based on the mean value of the objects in the cluster; (4) update the cluster means, that is, calculate the mean value of the objects for each cluster; (5) until no change; Figure 10.2 The k-means partitioning algorithm. 10.2 Partitioning Methods 453 (a) Initial clustering (b) Iterate (c) Final clustering + + + + + + + + + Figure 10.3 Clustering of a set of objects using the k-means method; for (b) update cluster centers and reassign objects accordingly (the mean of each cluster is marked by a +). Example 10.1 Clustering by k-means partitioning. Consider a set of objects located in 2-D space, as depicted in Figure 10.3(a). Let k = 3, that is, the user would like the objects to be partitioned into three clusters. According to the algorithm in Figure 10.2, we arbitrarily choose three objects as the three initial cluster centers, where cluster centers are marked by a +. Each object is assigned to a cluster based on the cluster center to which it is the nearest. Such a distribution forms silhouettes encircled by dotted curves, as shown in Figure 10.3(a). Next, the cluster centers are updated. That is, the mean value of each cluster is recal- culated based on the current objects in the cluster. Using the new cluster centers, the objects are redistributed to the clusters based on which cluster center is the nearest. Such a redistribution forms new silhouettes encircled by dashed curves, as shown in Figure 10.3(b). This process iterates, leading to Figure 10.3(c). The process of iteratively reassigning objects to clusters to improve the partitioning is referred to as iterative relocation. Even- tually, no reassignment of the objects in any cluster occurs and so the process terminates. The resulting clusters are returned by the clustering process. The k-means method is not guaranteed to converge to the global optimum and often terminates at a local optimum. The results may depend on the initial random selection of cluster centers. (You will be asked to give an example to show this as an exercise.) To obtain good results in practice, it is common to run the k-means algorithm multiple times with different initial cluster centers. The time complexity of the k-means algorithm is O(nkt), where n is the total number of objects, k is the number of clusters, and t is the number of iterations. Normally, k ≪n and t ≪n. Therefore, the method is relatively scalable and efﬁcient in processing large data sets. There are several variants of the k-means method. These can differ in the selection of the initial k-means, the calculation of dissimilarity, and the strategies for calculating cluster means. 454 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods The k-means method can be applied only when the mean of a set of objects is deﬁned. This may not be the case in some applications such as when data with nominal attributes are involved. The k-modes method is a variant of k-means, which extends the k-means paradigm to cluster nominal data by replacing the means of clusters with modes. It uses new dissimilarity measures to deal with nominal objects and a frequency-based method to update modes of clusters. The k-means and the k-modes methods can be integrated to cluster data with mixed numeric and nominal values. The necessity for users to specify k, the number of clusters, in advance can be seen as a disadvantage. There have been studies on how to overcome this difﬁculty, however, such as by providing an approximate range of k values, and then using an analytical technique to determine the best k by comparing the clustering results obtained for the different k values. The k-means method is not suitable for discovering clusters with nonconvex shapes or clusters of very different size. Moreover, it is sensitive to noise and outlier data points because a small number of such data can substantially inﬂuence the mean value. “How can we make the k-means algorithm more scalable?” One approach to mak- ing the k-means method more efﬁcient on large data sets is to use a good-sized set of samples in clustering. Another is to employ a ﬁltering approach that uses a spatial hier- archical data index to save costs when computing means. A third approach explores the microclustering idea, which ﬁrst groups nearby objects into “microclusters” and then performs k-means clustering on the microclusters. Microclustering is further discussed in Section 10.3. 10.2.2 k-Medoids: A Representative Object-Based Technique The k-means algorithm is sensitive to outliers because such objects are far away from the majority of the data, and thus, when assigned to a cluster, they can dramatically distort the mean value of the cluster. This inadvertently affects the assignment of other objects to clusters. This effect is particularly exacerbated due to the use of the squared-error function of Eq. (10.1), as observed in Example 10.2. Example 10.2 A drawback of k-means. Consider six points in 1-D space having the values 1,2,3,8,9,10, and 25, respectively. Intuitively, by visual inspection we may imagine the points partitioned into the clusters {1,2,3} and {8,9,10}, where point 25 is excluded because it appears to be an outlier. How would k-means partition the values? If we apply k-means using k = 2 and Eq. (10.1), the partitioning {{1,2,3},{8,9,10,25}} has the within-cluster variation (1 −2)2 + (2 −2)2 + (3 −2)2 + (8 −13)2 + (9 −13)2 + (10 −13)2 + (25 −13)2 =196, given that the mean of cluster {1,2,3} is 2 and the mean of {8,9,10,25} is 13. Compare this to the partitioning {{1,2,3,8},{9,10,25}}, for which k-means computes the within- cluster variation as (1 −3.5)2 + (2 −3.5)2 + (3 −3.5)2 + (8 −3.5)2 + (9 −14.67)2 + (10 −14.67)2 + (25 −14.67)2 = 189.67, 10.2 Partitioning Methods 455 given that 3.5 is the mean of cluster {1,2,3,8} and 14.67 is the mean of cluster {9,10,25}. The latter partitioning has the lowest within-cluster variation; therefore, the k-means method assigns the value 8 to a cluster different from that containing 9 and 10 due to the outlier point 25. Moreover, the center of the second cluster, 14.67, is substantially far from all the members in the cluster. “How can we modify the k-means algorithm to diminish such sensitivity to outliers?” Instead of taking the mean value of the objects in a cluster as a reference point, we can pick actual objects to represent the clusters, using one representative object per cluster. Each remaining object is assigned to the cluster of which the representative object is the most similar. The partitioning method is then performed based on the principle of minimizing the sum of the dissimilarities between each object p and its corresponding representative object. That is, an absolute-error criterion is used, deﬁned as E = k X i=1 X p∈Ci dist(p,oi), (10.2) where E is the sum of the absolute error for all objects p in the data set, and oi is the representative object of Ci. This is the basis for the k-medoids method, which groups n objects into k clusters by minimizing the absolute error (Eq. 10.2). When k = 1, we can ﬁnd the exact median in O(n2) time. However, when k is a general positive number, the k-medoid problem is NP-hard. The Partitioning Around Medoids (PAM) algorithm (see Figure 10.5 later) is a pop- ular realization of k-medoids clustering. It tackles the problem in an iterative, greedy way. Like the k-means algorithm, the initial representative objects (called seeds) are chosen arbitrarily. We consider whether replacing a representative object by a nonrep- resentative object would improve the clustering quality. All the possible replacements are tried out. The iterative process of replacing representative objects by other objects continues until the quality of the resulting clustering cannot be improved by any replace- ment. This quality is measured by a cost function of the average dissimilarity between an object and the representative object of its cluster. Speciﬁcally, let o1,...,ok be the current set of representative objects (i.e., medoids). To determine whether a nonrepresentative object, denoted by orandom, is a good replace- ment for a current medoid oj (1 ≤j ≤k), we calculate the distance from every object p to the closest object in the set {o1,...,oj−1,orandom,oj+1,...,ok}, and use the distance to update the cost function. The reassignments of objects to {o1,...,oj−1,orandom,oj+1,...,ok} are simple. Suppose object p is currently assigned to a cluster represented by medoid oj (Figure 10.4a or b). Do we need to reassign p to a different cluster if oj is being replaced by orandom? Object p needs to be reassigned to either orandom or some other cluster represented by oi (i ̸= j), whichever is the closest. For example, in Figure 10.4(a), p is closest to oi and therefore is reassigned to oi. In Figure 10.4(b), however, p is closest to orandom and so is reassigned to orandom. What if, instead, p is currently assigned to a cluster represented by some other object oi, i ̸= j? 456 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods oi oj oi oj oi oj oi oj orandom orandom orandom orandom p (a) Reassigned to oi p (b) Reassigned to orandom p (c) No change p (d) Reassigned to orandom Data object Cluster center Before swapping After swapping Figure 10.4 Four cases of the cost function for k-medoids clustering. Object o remains assigned to the cluster represented by oi as long as o is still closer to oi than to orandom (Figure 10.4c). Otherwise, o is reassigned to orandom (Figure 10.4d). Each time a reassignment occurs, a difference in absolute error, E, is contributed to the cost function. Therefore, the cost function calculates the difference in absolute-error value if a current representative object is replaced by a nonrepresentative object. The total cost of swapping is the sum of costs incurred by all nonrepresentative objects. If the total cost is negative, then oj is replaced or swapped with orandom because the actual absolute-error E is reduced. If the total cost is positive, the current representative object, oj, is considered acceptable, and nothing is changed in the iteration. “Which method is more robust—k-means or k-medoids?” The k-medoids method is more robust than k-means in the presence of noise and outliers because a medoid is less inﬂuenced by outliers or other extreme values than a mean. However, the complexity of each iteration in the k-medoids algorithm is O(k(n −k)2). For large values of n and k, such computation becomes very costly, and much more costly than the k-means method. Both methods require the user to specify k, the number of clusters. “How can we scale up the k-medoids method?” A typical k-medoids partitioning algo- rithm like PAM (Figure 10.5) works effectively for small data sets, but does not scale well for large data sets. To deal with larger data sets, a sampling-based method called CLARA (Clustering LARge Applications) can be used. Instead of taking the whole data set into consideration, CLARA uses a random sample of the data set. The PAM algorithm is then applied to compute the best medoids from the sample. Ideally, the sample should closely represent the original data set. In many cases, a large sample works well if it is created so that each object has equal probability of being selected into the sample. The representa- tive objects (medoids) chosen will likely be similar to those that would have been chosen from the whole data set. CLARA builds clusterings from multiple random samples and returns the best clustering as the output. The complexity of computing the medoids on a random sample is O(ks2 + k(n −k)), where s is the size of the sample, k is the number of clusters, and n is the total number of objects. CLARA can deal with