this case, all of the identical tuples forming a group should be merged into one tuple. The count of this new, generalized tuple is set to the total number of tuples from the initial working relation that are represented by (i.e., merged into) the new generalized tuple. For example, suppose that by attribute-oriented induction, 52 data tuples from the initial working relation are all generalized to the same tuple, T. That is, the generali- zation of these 52 tuples resulted in 52 identical instances of tuple T. These 52 identical tuples are merged to form one instance of T, with a count that is set to 52. Other popular aggregate functions that could also be associated with each tuple include sum() and avg(). For a given generalized tuple, sum() contains the sum of the values of a given numeric attribute for the initial working relation tuples making up the generalized tuple. Suppose that tuple T contained sum(units sold) as an aggregate function. The sum value for tuple T would then be set to the total number of units sold for each of the 52 tuples. The aggregate avg() (average) is computed according to the formula avg() = sum()/count(). Example 4.12 Attribute-oriented induction. Here we show how attribute-oriented induction is per- formed on the initial working relation of Table 4.5. For each attribute of the relation, the generalization proceeds as follows: 1. name: Since there are a large number of distinct values for name and there is no generalization operation deﬁned on it, this attribute is removed. 2. gender: Since there are only two distinct values for gender, this attribute is retained and no generalization is performed on it. 3. major: Suppose that a concept hierarchy has been deﬁned that allows the attribute major to be generalized to the values {arts&sciences, engineering, business}. Suppose also that the attribute generalization threshold is set to 5, and that there are more than 20 distinct values for major in the initial working relation. By attribute generalization and attribute generalization control, major is therefore generalized by climbing the given concept hierarchy. 4. birth place: This attribute has a large number of distinct values; therefore, we would like to generalize it. Suppose that a concept hierarchy exists for birth place, deﬁned as “city < province or state < country.” If the number of distinct values for country in the initial working relation is greater than the attribute generalization threshold, then birth place should be removed, because even though a generalization operator exists for it, the generalization threshold would not be satisﬁed. If, instead, the number of distinct values for country is less than the attribute generalization threshold, then birth place should be generalized to birth country. 5. birth date: Suppose that a hierarchy exists that can generalize birth date to age and age to age range, and that the number of age ranges (or intervals) is small with 172 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing Table 4.6 Generalized Relation Obtained by Attribute-Oriented Induction on Table 4.5’s Data gender major birth country age range residence city gpa count M Science Canada 20 – 25 Richmond very good 16 F Science Foreign 25 – 30 Burnaby excellent 22 ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· respect to the attribute generalization threshold. Generalization of birth date should therefore take place. 6. residence: Suppose that residence is deﬁned by the attributes number, street, resi- dence city, residence province or state, and residence country. The number of distinct values for number and street will likely be very high, since these concepts are quite low level. The attributes number and street should therefore be removed so that residence is then generalized to residence city, which contains fewer distinct values. 7. phone#: As with the name attribute, phone# contains too many distinct values and should therefore be removed in generalization. 8. gpa: Suppose that a concept hierarchy exists for gpa that groups values for grade point average into numeric intervals like {3.75–4.0, 3.5–3.75, ...}, which in turn are grouped into descriptive values such as {“excellent”, “very good”, ...}. The attribute can therefore be generalized. The generalization process will result in groups of identical tuples. For example, the ﬁrst two tuples of Table 4.5 both generalize to the same identical tuple (namely, the ﬁrst tuple shown in Table 4.6). Such identical tuples are then merged into one, with their counts accumulated. This process leads to the generalized relation shown in Table 4.6. Based on the vocabulary used in OLAP, we may view count( ) as a measure, and the remaining attributes as dimensions. Note that aggregate functions, such as sum( ), may be applied to numeric attributes (e.g., salary and sales). These attributes are referred to as measure attributes. 4.5.2 Efﬁcient Implementation of Attribute-Oriented Induction “How is attribute-oriented induction actually implemented?” Section 4.5.1 provided an introduction to attribute-oriented induction. The general procedure is summarized in Figure 4.18. The efﬁciency of this algorithm is analyzed as follows: Step 1 of the algorithm is essentially a relational query to collect the task-relevant data into the working relation, W. Its processing efﬁciency depends on the query pro- cessing methods used. Given the successful implementation and commercialization of database systems, this step is expected to have good performance. Step 2 collects statistics on the working relation. This requires scanning the relation at most once. The cost for computing the minimum desired level and determining the mapping pairs, (v, v′), for each attribute is dependent on the number of distinct 4.5 Data Generalization by Attribute-Oriented Induction 173 Algorithm: Attribute-oriented induction. Mining generalized characteristics in a relational database given a user’s data mining request. Input: DB, a relational database; DMQuery, a data mining query; a list, a list of attributes (containing attributes, ai); Gen(ai), a set of concept hierarchies or generalization operators on attributes, ai; a gen thresh(ai), attribute generalization thresholds for each ai. Output: P, a Prime generalized relation. Method: 1. W ←get task relevant data (DMQuery, DB); // Let W, the working relation, hold the task-relevant data. 2. prepare for generalization (W); // This is implemented as follows. (a) Scan W and collect the distinct values for each attribute, ai. (Note: If W is very large, this may be done by examining a sample of W.) (b) For each attribute ai, determine whether ai should be removed. If not, compute its minimum desired level Li based on its given or default attribute threshold, and determine the mapping pairs (v, v′), where v is a distinct value of ai in W, and v′ is its corresponding generalized value at level Li. 3. P ←generalization (W), The Prime generalized relation, P, is derived by replacing each value v in W by its corresponding v′ in the mapping while accumulating count and computing any other aggregate values. This step can be implemented efﬁciently using either of the two following variations: (a) For each generalized tuple, insert the tuple into a sorted prime relation P by a binary search: if the tuple is already in P, simply increase its count and other aggregate values accordingly; otherwise, insert it into P. (b) Since in most cases the number of distinct values at the prime relation level is small, the prime relation can be coded as an m-dimensional array, where m is the number of attributes in P, and each dimension contains the corresponding generalized attribute values. Each array element holds the corresponding count and other aggregation values, if any. The insertion of a generalized tuple is performed by measure aggregation in the corresponding array element. Figure 4.18 Basic algorithm for attribute-oriented induction. 174 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing values for each attribute and is smaller than |W|, the number of tuples in the work- ing relation. Notice that it may not be necessary to scan the working relation once, since if the working relation is large, a sample of such a relation will be sufﬁcient to get statistics and determine which attributes should be generalized to a certain high level and which attributes should be removed. Moreover, such statistics may also be obtained in the process of extracting and generating a working relation in Step 1. Step 3 derives the prime relation, P. This is performed by scanning each tuple in the working relation and inserting generalized tuples into P. There are a total of |W| tuples in W and p tuples in P. For each tuple, t, in W, we substitute its attribute values based on the derived mapping pairs. This results in a generalized tuple, t′. If variation (a) in Figure 4.18 is adopted, each t′ takes O(logp) to ﬁnd the location for the count increment or tuple insertion. Thus, the total time complexity is O(|W| × logp) for all of the generalized tuples. If variation (b) is adopted, each t′ takes O(1) to ﬁnd the tuple for the count increment. Thus, the overall time complexity is O(N) for all of the generalized tuples. Many data analysis tasks need to examine a good number of dimensions or attributes. This may involve dynamically introducing and testing additional attributes rather than just those speciﬁed in the mining query. Moreover, a user with little knowledge of the truly relevant data set may simply specify “in relevance to ∗” in the mining query, which includes all of the attributes in the analysis. Therefore, an advanced–concept description mining process needs to perform attribute relevance analysis on large sets of attributes to select the most relevant ones. This analysis may employ correlation measures or tests of statistical signiﬁcance, as described in Chapter 3 on data preprocessing. Example 4.13 Presentation of generalization results. Suppose that attribute-oriented induction was performed on a sales relation of the AllElectronics database, resulting in the generalized description of Table 4.7 for sales last year. The description is shown in the form of a generalized relation. Table 4.6 is another generalized relation example. Such generalized relations can also be presented in the form of cross-tabulation forms, various kinds of graphic presentation (e.g., pie charts and bar charts), and quantitative characteristics rules (i.e., showing how different value combinations are distributed in the generalized relation). Table 4.7 Generalized Relation for Last Year’s Sales location item sales (in million dollars) count (in thousands) Asia TV 15 300 Europe TV 12 250 North America TV 28 450 Asia computer 120 1000 Europe computer 150 1200 North America computer 200 1800 4.5 Data Generalization by Attribute-Oriented Induction 175 4.5.3 Attribute-Oriented Induction for Class Comparisons In many applications, users may not be interested in having a single class (or con- cept) described or characterized, but prefer to mine a description that compares or distinguishes one class (or concept) from other comparable classes (or concepts). Class discrimination or comparison (hereafter referred to as class comparison) mines descriptions that distinguish a target class from its contrasting classes. Notice that the target and contrasting classes must be comparable in the sense that they share similar dimensions and attributes. For example, the three classes person, address, and item are not comparable. However, sales in the last three years are comparable classes, and so are, for example, computer science students versus physics students. Our discussions on class characterization in the previous sections handle multilevel data summarization and characterization in a single class. The techniques developed can be extended to handle class comparison across several comparable classes. For example, the attribute generalization process described for class characterization can be modiﬁed so that the generalization is performed synchronously among all the classes compared. This allows the attributes in all of the classes to be generalized to the same abstraction levels. Suppose, for instance, that we are given the AllElectronics data for sales in 2009 and in 2010 and want to compare these two classes. Consider the dimension location with abstractions at the city, province or state, and country levels. Data in each class should be generalized to the same location level. That is, they are all synchronously generalized to either the city level, the province or state level, or the country level. Ideally, this is more useful than comparing, say, the sales in Vancouver in 2009 with the sales in the United States in 2010 (i.e., where each set of sales data is generalized to a different level). The users, however, should have the option to overwrite such an automated, synchronous comparison with their own choices, when preferred. “How is class comparison performed?” In general, the procedure is as follows: 1. Data collection: The set of relevant data in the database is collected by query process- ing and is partitioned respectively into a target class and one or a set of contrasting classes. 2. Dimension relevance analysis: If there are many dimensions, then dimension rele- vance analysis should be performed on these classes to select only the highly relevant dimensions for further analysis. Correlation or entropy-based measures can be used for this step (Chapter 3). 3. Synchronous generalization: Generalization is performed on the target class to the level controlled by a user- or expert-speciﬁed dimension threshold, which results in a prime target class relation. The concepts in the contrasting class(es) are generali- zed to the same level as those in the prime target class relation, forming the prime contrasting class(es) relation. 4. Presentation of the derived comparison: The resulting class comparison description can be visualized in the form of tables, graphs, and rules. This presentation usually includes a “contrasting” measure such as count% (percentage count) that reﬂects the 176 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing comparison between the target and contrasting classes. The user can adjust the com- parison description by applying drill-down, roll-up, and other OLAP operations to the target and contrasting classes, as desired. The preceding discussion outlines a general algorithm for mining comparisons in databases. In comparison with characterization, the previous algorithm involves synchronous generalization of the target class with the contrasting classes, so that classes are simultaneously compared at the same abstraction levels. Example 4.14 mines a class comparison describing the graduate and undergraduate students at Big University. Example 4.14 Mining a class comparison. Suppose that you would like to compare the general pro- perties of the graduate and undergraduate students at Big University, given the attributes name, gender, major, birth place, birth date, residence, phone#, and gpa. This data mining task can be expressed in DMQL as follows: use Big University DB mine comparison as “grad vs undergrad students” in relevance to name, gender, major, birth place, birth date, residence, phone#, gpa for “graduate students” where status in “graduate” versus “undergraduate students” where status in “undergraduate” analyze count% from student Let’s see how this typical example of a data mining query for mining comparison descriptions can be processed. First, the query is transformed into two relational queries that collect two sets of task- relevant data: one for the initial target-class working relation and the other for the initial contrasting-class working relation, as shown in Tables 4.8 and 4.9. This can also be viewed as the construction of a data cube, where the status {graduate, undergraduate} serves as one dimension, and the other attributes form the remaining dimensions. Second, dimension relevance analysis can be performed, when necessary, on the two classes of data. After this analysis, irrelevant or weakly relevant dimensions (e.g., name, gender, birth place, residence, and phone#) are removed from the resulting classes. Only the highly relevant attributes are included in the subsequent analysis. Third, synchronous generalization is performed on the target class to the levels con- trolled by user- or expert-speciﬁed dimension thresholds, forming the prime target class relation. The contrasting class is generalized to the same levels as those in the prime target class relation, forming the prime contrasting class(es) relation, as presented in Tables 4.10 and 4.11. In comparison with undergraduate students, graduate students tend to be older and have a higher GPA in general. 4.5 Data Generalization by Attribute-Oriented Induction 177 Table 4.8 Initial Working Relations: The Target Class (Graduate Students) name gender major birth place birth date residence phone# gpa Jim Woodman M CS Vancouver, BC, Canada 12-8-76 3511 Main St., Richmond 687-4598 3.67 Scott Lachance M CS Montreal, Que, Canada 7-28-75 345 1st Ave., Vancouver 253-9106 3.70 Laura Lee F Physics Seattle, WA, USA 8-25-70 125 Austin Ave., Burnaby 420-5232 3.83 ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· Table 4.9 Initial Working Relations: The Contrasting Class (Undergraduate Students) name gender major birth place birth date residence phone# gpa Bob Schumann M Chemistry Calgary, Alt, Canada 1-10-78 2642 Halifax St., Burnaby 294-4291 2.96 Amy Eau F Biology Golden, BC, Canada 3-30-76 463 Sunset Cres., Vancouver 681-5417 3.52 ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· ··· Table 4.10 Prime Generalized Relation for the Target Class (Graduate Students) major age range gpa count% Science 21...25 good 5.53 Science 26...30 good 5.02 Science over 30 very good 5.86 ··· ··· ··· ··· Business over 30 excellent 4.68 Table 4.11 Prime Generalized Relation for the Contrasting Class (Undergraduate Students) major age range gpa count% Science 16...20 fair 5.53 Science 16...20 good 4.53 ··· ··· ··· ··· Science 26...30 good 2.32 ··· ··· ··· ··· Business over 30 excellent 0.68 Finally, the resulting class comparison is presented in the form of tables, graphs, and/or rules. This visualization includes a contrasting measure (e.g., count%) that com- pares the target class and the contrasting class. For example, 5.02% of the graduate students majoring in science are between 26 and 30 years old and have a “good” GPA, while only 2.32% of undergraduates have these same characteristics. Drilling and other 178 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing OLAP operations may be performed on the target and contrasting classes as deemed necessary by the user in order to adjust the abstraction levels of the ﬁnal description. In summary, attribute-oriented induction for data characterization and generaliza- tion provides an alternative data generalization method in comparison to the data cube approach. It is not conﬁned to relational data because such an induction can be per- formed on spatial, multimedia, sequence, and other kinds of data sets. In addition, there is no need to precompute a data cube because generalization can be performed online upon receiving a user’s query. Moreover, automated analysis can be added to such an induction process to auto- matically ﬁlter out irrelevant or unimportant attributes. However, because attribute- oriented induction automatically generalizes data to a higher level, it cannot efﬁciently support the process of drilling down to levels deeper than those provided in the general- ized relation. The integration of data cube technology with attribute-oriented induction may provide a balance between precomputation and online computation. This would also support fast online computation when it is necessary to drill down to a level deeper than that provided in the generalized relation. 4.6 Summary A data warehouse is a subject-oriented, integrated, time-variant, and nonvolatile data collection organized in support of management decision making. Several factors distinguish data warehouses from operational databases. Because the two systems provide quite different functionalities and require different kinds of data, it is necessary to maintain data warehouses separately from operational databases. Data warehouses often adopt a three-tier architecture. The bottom tier is a ware- house database server, which is typically a relational database system. The middle tier is an OLAP server, and the top tier is a client that contains query and reporting tools. A data warehouse contains back-end tools and utilities for populating and refresh- ing the warehouse. These cover data extraction, data cleaning, data transformation, loading, refreshing, and warehouse management. Data warehouse metadata are data deﬁning the warehouse objects. A metadata repository provides details regarding the warehouse structure, data history, the algo- rithms used for summarization, mappings from the source data to the warehouse form, system performance, and business terms and issues. A multidimensional data model is typically used for the design of corporate data warehouses and departmental data marts. Such a model can adopt a star schema, snowﬂake schema, or fact constellation schema. The core of the multidimensional model is the data cube, which consists of a large set of facts (or measures) and a number of dimensions. Dimensions are the entities or perspectives with respect to which an organization wants to keep records and are hierarchical in nature. 4.6 Summary 179 A data cube consists of a lattice of cuboids, each corresponding to a different degree of summarization of the given multidimensional data. Concept hierarchies organize the values of attributes or dimensions into gradual abstraction levels. They are useful in mining at multiple abstraction levels. Online analytical processing can be performed in data warehouses/marts using the multidimensional data model. Typical OLAP operations include roll-up, and drill-(down, across, through), slice-and-dice, and pivot (rotate), as well as statistical operations such as ranking and computing moving averages and growth rates. OLAP operations can be implemented efﬁciently using the data cube structure. Data warehouses are used for information processing (querying and reporting), analytical processing (which allows users to navigate through summarized and detailed data by OLAP operations), and data mining (which supports knowledge discovery). OLAP-based data mining is referred to as multidimensional data min- ing (also known as exploratory multidimensional data mining, online analytical mining, or OLAM). It emphasizes the interactive and exploratory nature of data mining. OLAP servers may adopt a relational OLAP (ROLAP), a multidimensional OLAP (MOLAP), or a hybrid OLAP (HOLAP) implementation. A ROLAP server uses an extended relational DBMS that maps OLAP operations on multidimensional data to standard relational operations. A MOLAP server maps multidimensional data views directly to array structures. A HOLAP server combines ROLAP and MOLAP. For example, it may use ROLAP for historic data while maintaining frequently accessed data in a separate MOLAP store. Full materialization refers to the computation of all of the cuboids in the lattice deﬁning a data cube. It typically requires an excessive amount of storage space, particularly as the number of dimensions and size of associated concept hierarchies grow. This problem is known as the curse of dimensionality. Alternatively, partial materialization is the selective computation of a subset of the cuboids or subcubes in the lattice. For example, an iceberg cube is a data cube that stores only those cube cells that have an aggregate value (e.g., count) above some minimum support threshold. OLAP query processing can be made more efﬁcient with the use of indexing tech- niques. In bitmap indexing, each attribute has its own bitmap index table. Bitmap indexing reduces join, aggregation, and comparison operations to bit arithmetic. Join indexing registers the joinable rows of two or more relations from a relational database, reducing the overall cost of OLAP join operations. Bitmapped join index- ing, which combines the bitmap and join index methods, can be used to further speed up OLAP query processing. Data generalization is a process that abstracts a large set of task-relevant data in a database from a relatively low conceptual level to higher conceptual lev- els. Data generalization approaches include data cube-based data aggregation and 180 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing attribute-oriented induction. Concept description is the most basic form of descrip- tive data mining. It describes a given set of task-relevant data in a concise and summarative manner, presenting interesting general properties of the data. Concept (or class) description consists of characterization and comparison (or discrimi- nation). The former summarizes and describes a data collection, called the target class, whereas the latter summarizes and distinguishes one data collection, called the target class, from other data collection(s), collectively called the contrasting class(es). Concept characterization can be implemented using data cube (OLAP-based) approaches and the attribute-oriented induction approach. These are attribute- or dimension-based generalization approaches. The attribute-oriented induction approach consists of the following techniques: data focusing, data generalization by attribute removal or attribute generalization, count and aggregate value accumulation, attribute generalization control, and generalization data visualization. Concept comparison can be performed using the attribute-oriented induction or data cube approaches in a manner similar to concept characterization. Generalized tuples from the target and contrasting classes can be quantitatively compared and contrasted. 4.7 Exercises 4.1 State why, for the integration of multiple heterogeneous information sources, many companies in industry prefer the update-driven approach (which constructs and uses data warehouses), rather than the query-driven approach (which applies wrappers and integrators). Describe situations where the query-driven approach is preferable to the update-driven approach. 4.2 Brieﬂy compare the following concepts. You may use an example to explain your point(s). (a) Snowﬂake schema, fact constellation, starnet query model (b) Data cleaning, data transformation, refresh (c) Discovery-driven cube, multifeature cube, virtual warehouse 4.3 Suppose that a data warehouse consists of the three dimensions time, doctor, and patient, and the two measures count and charge, where charge is the fee that a doctor charges a patient for a visit. (a) Enumerate three classes of schemas that are popularly used for modeling data warehouses. (b) Draw a schema diagram for the above data warehouse using one of the schema classes listed in (a). 4.7 Exercises 181 (c) Starting with the base cuboid [day,doctor,patient], what speciﬁc OLAP operations should be performed in order to list the total fee collected by each doctor in 2010? (d) To obtain the same list, write an SQL query assuming the data are stored in a rela- tional database with the schema fee (day, month, year, doctor, hospital, patient, count, charge). 4.4 Suppose that a data warehouse for Big University consists of the four dimensions stu- dent, course, semester, and instructor, and two measures count and avg grade. At the lowest conceptual level (e.g., for a given student, course, semester, and instructor com- bination), the avg grade measure stores the actual course grade of the student. At higher conceptual levels, avg grade stores the average grade for the given combination. (a) Draw a snowﬂake schema diagram for the data warehouse. (b) Starting with the base cuboid [student,course,semester,instructor], what speciﬁc OLAP operations (e.g., roll-up from semester to year) should you perform in order to list the average grade of CS courses for each Big University student. (c) If each dimension has ﬁve levels (including all), such as “student < major < status < university < all”, how many cuboids will this cube contain (including the base and apex cuboids)? 4.5 Suppose that a data warehouse consists of the four dimensions date, spectator, location, and game, and the two measures count and charge, where charge is the fare that a spec- tator pays when watching a game on a given date. Spectators may be students, adults, or seniors, with each category having its own charge rate. (a) Draw a star schema diagram for the data warehouse. (b) Starting with the base cuboid [date,spectator,location,game], what speciﬁc OLAP operations should you perform in order to list the total charge paid by student spectators at GM Place in 2010? (c) Bitmap indexing is useful in data warehousing. Taking this cube as an example, brieﬂy discuss advantages and problems of using a bitmap index structure. 4.6 A data warehouse can be modeled by either a star schema or a snowﬂake schema. Brieﬂy describe the similarities and the differences of the two models, and then analyze their advantages and disadvantages with regard to one another. Give your opinion of which might be more empirically useful and state the reasons behind your answer. 4.7 Design a data warehouse for a regional weather bureau. The weather bureau has about 1000 probes, which are scattered throughout various land and ocean locations in the region to collect basic weather data, including air pressure, temperature, and precipi- tation at each hour. All data are sent to the central station, which has collected such data for more than 10 years. Your design should facilitate efﬁcient querying and online analytical processing, and derive general weather patterns in multidimensional space. 4.8 A popular data warehouse implementation is to construct a multidimensional database, known as a data cube. Unfortunately, this may often generate a huge, yet very sparse, multidimensional matrix. 182 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing (a) Present an example illustrating such a huge and sparse data cube. (b) Design an implementation method that can elegantly overcome this sparse matrix problem. Note that you need to explain your data structures in detail and discuss the space needed, as well as how to retrieve data from your structures. (c) Modify your design in (b) to handle incremental data updates. Give the reasoning behind your new design. 4.9 Regarding the computation of measures in a data cube: (a) Enumerate three categories of measures, based on the kind of aggregate functions used in computing a data cube. (b) For a data cube with the three dimensions time, location, and item, which category does the function variance belong to? Describe how to compute it if the cube is partitioned into many chunks. Hint: The formula for computing variance is 1 N PN i=1(xi −¯xi)2, where ¯xi is the average of xis. (c) Suppose the function is “top 10 sales.” Discuss how to efﬁciently compute this measure in a data cube. 4.10 Suppose a company wants to design a data warehouse to facilitate the analysis of moving vehicles in an online analytical processing manner. The company registers huge amounts of auto movement data in the format of (Auto ID, location, speed, time). Each Auto ID represents a vehicle associated with information (e.g., vehicle category, driver category), and each location may be associated with a street in a city. Assume that a street map is available for the city. (a) Design such a data warehouse to facilitate effective online analytical processing in multidimensional space. (b) The movement data may contain noise. Discuss how you would develop a method to automatically discover data records that were likely erroneously registered in the data repository. (c) The movement data may be sparse. Discuss how you would develop a method that constructs a reliable data warehouse despite the sparsity of data. (d) If you want to drive from A to B starting at a particular time, discuss how a system may use the data in this warehouse to work out a fast route. 4.11 Radio-frequency identiﬁcation is commonly used to trace object movement and per- form inventory control. An RFID reader can successfully read an RFID tag from a limited distance at any scheduled time. Suppose a company wants to design a data warehouse to facilitate the analysis of objects with RFID tags in an online analytical pro- cessing manner. The company registers huge amounts of RFID data in the format of (RFID, at location, time), and also has some information about the objects carrying the RFID tag, for example, (RFID, product name, product category, producer, date produced, price). (a) Design a data warehouse to facilitate effective registration and online analytical processing of such data. 4.7 Exercises 183 (b) The RFID data may contain lots of redundant information. Discuss a method that maximally reduces redundancy during data registration in the RFID data warehouse. (c) The RFID data may contain lots of noise such as missing registration and misread IDs. Discuss a method that effectively cleans up the noisy data in the RFID data warehouse. (d) You may want to perform online analytical processing to determine how many TV sets were shipped from the LA seaport to BestBuy in Champaign, IL, by month, brand, and price range. Outline how this could be done efﬁciently if you were to store such RFID data in the warehouse. (e) If a customer returns a jug of milk and complains that is has spoiled before its expi- ration date, discuss how you can investigate such a case in the warehouse to ﬁnd out what the problem is, either in shipping or in storage. 4.12 In many applications, new data sets are incrementally added to the existing large data sets. Thus, an important consideration is whether a measure can be computed efﬁciently in an incremental manner. Use count, standard deviation, and median as examples to show that a distributive or algebraic measure facilitates efﬁcient incremental computation, whereas a holistic measure does not. 4.13 Suppose that we need to record three measures in a data cube: min(), average(), and median(). Design an efﬁcient computation and storage method for each measure given that the cube allows data to be deleted incrementally (i.e., in small portions at a time) from the cube. 4.14 In data warehouse technology, a multiple dimensional view can be implemented by a relational database technique (ROLAP), by a multidimensional database technique (MOLAP), or by a hybrid database technique (HOLAP). (a) Brieﬂy describe each implementation technique. (b) For each technique, explain how each of the following functions may be implemented: i. The generation of a data warehouse (including aggregation) ii. Roll-up iii. Drill-down iv. Incremental updating (c) Which implementation techniques do you prefer, and why? 4.15 Suppose that a data warehouse contains 20 dimensions, each with about ﬁve levels of granularity. (a) Users are mainly interested in four particular dimensions, each having three fre- quently accessed levels for rolling up and drilling down. How would you design a data cube structure to support this preference efﬁciently? (b) At times, a user may want to drill through the cube to the raw data for one or two particular dimensions. How would you support this feature? 184 Chapter 4 Data Warehousing and Online Analytical Processing 4.16 A data cube, C, has n dimensions, and each dimension has exactly p distinct values in the base cuboid. Assume that there are no concept hierarchies associated with the dimensions. (a) What is the maximum number of cells possible in the base cuboid? (b) What is the minimum number of cells possible in the base cuboid? (c) What is the maximum number of cells possible (including both base cells and aggregate cells) in the C data cube? (d) What is the minimum number of cells possible in C? 4.17 What are the differences between the three main types of data warehouse usage: infor- mation processing, analytical processing, and data mining? Discuss the motivation behind OLAP mining (OLAM). 4.8 Bibliographic Notes There are a good number of introductory-level textbooks on data warehousing and OLAP technology—for example, Kimball, Ross, Thornthwaite, et al. [KRTM08]; Imhoff, Galemmo, and Geiger [IGG03]; and Inmon [Inm96]. Chaudhuri and Dayal [CD97] provide an early overview of data warehousing and OLAP technology. A set of research papers on materialized views and data warehouse implementations were col- lected in Materialized Views: Techniques, Implementations, and Applications by Gupta and Mumick [GM99]. The history of decision support systems can be traced back to the 1960s. However, the proposal to construct large data warehouses for multidimensional data analysis is credited to Codd [CCS93] who coined the term OLAP for online analytical processing. The OLAP Council was established in 1995. Widom [Wid95] identiﬁed several research problems in data warehousing. Kimball and Ross [KR02] provide an overview of the deﬁciencies of SQL regarding the ability to support comparisons that are common in the business world, and present a good set of application cases that require data warehousing and OLAP technology. For an overview of OLAP systems versus statistical databases, see Shoshani [Sho97]. Gray et al. [GCB+97] proposed the data cube as a relational aggregation operator generalizing group-by, crosstabs, and subtotals. Harinarayan, Rajaraman, and Ullman [HRU96] proposed a greedy algorithm for the partial materialization of cuboids in the computation of a data cube. Data cube computation methods have been investigated by numerous studies such as Sarawagi and Stonebraker [SS94]; Agarwal et al. [AAD+96]; Zhao, Deshpande, and Naughton [ZDN97]; Ross and Srivastava [RS97]; Beyer and Ramakrishnan [BR99]; Han, Pei, Dong, and Wang [HPDW01]; and Xin, Han, Li, and Wah [XHLW03]. These methods are discussed in depth in Chapter 5. The concept of iceberg queries was ﬁrst introduced in Fang, Shivakumar, Garcia- Molina et al. [FSGM+98]. The use of join indices to speed up relational query processing was proposed by Valduriez [Val87]. O’Neil and Graefe [OG95] proposed a bitmapped 4.8 Bibliographic Notes 185 join index method to speed up OLAP-based query processing. A discussion of the per- formance of bitmapping and other nontraditional index techniques is given in O’Neil and Quass [OQ97]. For work regarding the selection of materialized cuboids for efﬁcient OLAP query processing, see, for example, Chaudhuri and Dayal [CD97]; Harinarayan, Rajaraman, and Ullman [HRU96]; and Sristava et al. [SDJL96]. Methods for cube size estimation can be found in Deshpande et al. [DNR+97], Ross and Srivastava [RS97], and Beyer and Ramakrishnan [BR99]. Agrawal, Gupta, and Sarawagi [AGS97] proposed operations for modeling multidimensional databases. Methods for answering queries quickly by online aggregation are described in Hellerstein, Haas, and Wang [HHW97] and Hellerstein et al. [HAC+99]. Techniques for estimating the top N queries are proposed in Carey and Kossman [CK98] and Donjerkovic and Ramakrishnan [DR99]. Further studies on intelligent OLAP and discovery-driven exploration of data cubes are presented in the bibliographic notes in Chapter 5. This page intentionally left blank 5 Data Cube Technology Data warehouse systems provide online analytical processing (OLAP) tools for interactive analysis of multidimensional data at varied granularity levels. OLAP tools typically use the data cube and a multidimensional data model to provide ﬂexible access to summa- rized data. For example, a data cube can store precomputed measures (like count() and total sales()) for multiple combinations of data dimensions (like item, region, and customer). Users can pose OLAP queries on the data. They can also interactively explore the data in a multidimensional way through OLAP operations like drill-down (to see more spe- cialized data such as total sales per city) or roll-up (to see the data at a more generalized level such as total sales per country). Although the data cube concept was originally intended for OLAP, it is also use- ful for data mining. Multidimensional data mining is an approach to data mining that integrates OLAP-based data analysis with knowledge discovery techniques. It is also known as exploratory multidimensional data mining and online analytical mining (OLAM). It searches for interesting patterns by exploring the data in multidimensional space. This gives users the freedom to dynamically focus on any subset of interesting dimensions. Users can interactively drill down or roll up to varying abstraction levels to ﬁnd classiﬁcation models, clusters, predictive rules, and outliers. This chapter focuses on data cube technology. In particular, we study methods for data cube computation and methods for multidimensional data analysis. Precomput- ing a data cube (or parts of a data cube) allows for fast accessing of summarized data. Given the high dimensionality of most data, multidimensional analysis can run into performance bottlenecks. Therefore, it is important to study data cube computation techniques. Luckily, data cube technology provides many effective and scalable meth- ods for cube computation. Studying these methods will also help in our understanding and further development of scalable methods for other data mining tasks such as the discovery of frequent patterns (Chapters 6 and 7). We begin in Section 5.1 with preliminary concepts for cube computation. These sum- marize the data cube notion as a lattice of cuboids, and describe basic forms of cube materialization. General strategies for cube computation are given. Section 5.2 follows with an in-depth look at speciﬁc methods for data cube computation. We study both full materialization (i.e., where all the cuboids representing a data cube are precomputed c⃝2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques 187 188 Chapter 5 Data Cube Technology and thereby ready for use) and partial cuboid materialization (where, say, only the more “useful” parts of the data cube are precomputed). The multiway array aggregation method is detailed for full cube computation. Methods for partial cube computation, including BUC, Star-Cubing, and the use of cube shell fragments, are discussed. In Section 5.3, we study cube-based query processing. The techniques described build on the standard methods of cube computation presented in Section 5.2. You will learn about sampling cubes for OLAP query answering on sampling data (e.g., survey data, which represent a sample or subset of a target data population of interest). In addi- tion, you will learn how to compute ranking cubes for efﬁcient top-k (ranking) query processing in large relational data sets. In Section 5.4, we describe various ways to perform multidimensional data analysis using data cubes. Prediction cubes are introduced, which facilitate predictive modeling in multidimensional space. We discuss multifeature cubes, which compute complex queries involving multiple dependent aggregates at multiple granularities. You will also learn about the exception-based discovery-driven exploration of cube space, where visual cues are displayed to indicate discovered data exceptions at all aggregation levels, thereby guiding the user in the data analysis process. 5.1 Data Cube Computation: Preliminary Concepts Data cubes facilitate the online analytical processing of multidimensional data. “But how can we compute data cubes in advance, so that they are handy and readily available for query processing?” This section contrasts full cube materialization (i.e., precomputation) versus various strategies for partial cube materialization. For completeness, we begin with a review of the basic terminology involving data cubes. We also introduce a cube cell notation that is useful for describing data cube computation methods. 5.1.1 Cube Materialization: Full Cube, Iceberg Cube, Closed Cube, and Cube Shell Figure 5.1 shows a 3-D data cube for the dimensions A, B, and C, and an aggregate mea- sure, M. Commonly used measures include count(), sum(), min(), max(), and total sales(). A data cube is a lattice of cuboids. Each cuboid represents a group-by. ABC is the base cuboid, containing all three of the dimensions. Here, the aggregate measure, M, is com- puted for each possible combination of the three dimensions. The base cuboid is the least generalized of all the cuboids in the data cube. The most generalized cuboid is the apex cuboid, commonly represented as all. It contains one value—it aggregates measure M for all the tuples stored in the base cuboid. To drill down in the data cube, we move from the apex cuboid downward in the lattice. To roll up, we move from the base cuboid upward. For the purposes of our discussion in this chapter, we will always use the term data cube to refer to a lattice of cuboids rather than an individual cuboid. 5.1 Data Cube Computation: Preliminary Concepts 189 A AB AC BC ABC (base cuboid) all (apex cuboid) B C Figure 5.1 Lattice of cuboids making up a 3-D data cube with the dimensions A, B, and C for some aggregate measure, M. A cell in the base cuboid is a base cell. A cell from a nonbase cuboid is an aggregate cell. An aggregate cell aggregates over one or more dimensions, where each aggregated dimension is indicated by a ∗in the cell notation. Suppose we have an n-dimensional data cube. Let a = (a1, a2,..., an, measures) be a cell from one of the cuboids making up the data cube. We say that a is an m-dimensional cell (i.e., from an m-dimensional cuboid) if exactly m (m ≤n) values among {a1, a2,..., an} are not ∗. If m = n, then a is a base cell; otherwise, it is an aggregate cell (i.e., where m < n). Example 5.1 Base and aggregate cells. Consider a data cube with the dimensions month, city, and customer group, and the measure sales. (Jan, ∗, ∗, 2800) and (∗, Chicago, ∗, 1200) are 1-D cells; (Jan, ∗, Business, 150) is a 2-D cell; and (Jan, Chicago, Business, 45) is a 3-D cell. Here, all base cells are 3-D, whereas 1-D and 2-D cells are aggregate cells. An ancestor–descendant relationship may exist between cells. In an n-dimensional data cube, an i-D cell a = (a1, a2,..., an, measuresa) is an ancestor of a j-D cell b = (b1, b2,..., bn, measuresb), and b is a descendant of a, if and only if (1) i < j, and (2) for 1 ≤k ≤n, ak = bk whenever ak ̸= ∗. In particular, cell a is called a parent of cell b, and b is a child of a, if and only if j = i + 1. Example 5.2 Ancestor and descendant cells. Referring to Example 5.1, 1-D cell a = (Jan, ∗, ∗, 2800) and 2-D cell b = (Jan, ∗, Business, 150) are ancestors of 3-D cell c = (Jan, Chicago, Business, 45); c is a descendant of both a and b; b is a parent of c; and c is a child of b. To ensure fast OLAP, it is sometimes desirable to precompute the full cube (i.e., all the cells of all the cuboids for a given data cube). A method of full cube computation is given in Section 5.2.1. Full cube computation, however, is exponential to the number of dimensions. That is, a data cube of n dimensions contains 2n cuboids. There are even 190 Chapter 5 Data Cube Technology more cuboids if we consider concept hierarchies for each dimension.1 In addition, the size of each cuboid depends on the cardinality of its dimensions. Thus, precomputation of the full cube can require huge and often excessive amounts of memory. Nonetheless, full cube computation algorithms are important. Individual cuboids may be stored on secondary storage and accessed when necessary. Alternatively, we can use such algorithms to compute smaller cubes, consisting of a subset of the given set of dimensions, or a smaller range of possible values for some of the dimensions. In these cases, the smaller cube is a full cube for the given subset of dimensions and/or dimension values. A thorough understanding of full cube computation methods will help us develop efﬁcient methods for computing partial cubes. Hence, it is important to explore scalable methods for computing all the cuboids making up a data cube, that is, for full materialization. These methods must take into consideration the limited amount of main memory available for cuboid computation, the total size of the computed data cube, as well as the time required for such computation. Partial materialization of data cubes offers an interesting trade-off between storage space and response time for OLAP. Instead of computing the full cube, we can compute only a subset of the data cube’s cuboids, or subcubes consisting of subsets of cells from the various cuboids. Many cells in a cuboid may actually be of little or no interest to the data analyst. Recall that each cell in a full cube records an aggregate value such as count or sum. For many cells in a cuboid, the measure value will be zero. When the product of the cardinalities for the dimensions in a cuboid is large relative to the number of nonzero-valued tuples that are stored in the cuboid, then we say that the cuboid is sparse. If a cube contains many sparse cuboids, we say that the cube is sparse. In many cases, a substantial amount of the cube’s space could be taken up by a large number of cells with very low measure values. This is because the cube cells are often quite sparsely distributed within a multidimensional space. For example, a customer may only buy a few items in a store at a time. Such an event will generate only a few nonempty cells, leaving most other cube cells empty. In such situations, it is useful to materialize only those cells in a cuboid (group-by) with a measure value above some minimum threshold. In a data cube for sales, say, we may wish to materialize only those cells for which count ≥10 (i.e., where at least 10 tuples exist for the cell’s given combination of dimensions), or only those cells representing sales ≥$100. This not only saves processing time and disk space, but also leads to a more focused analysis. The cells that cannot pass the threshold are likely to be too trivial to warrant further analysis. Such partially materialized cubes are known as iceberg cubes. The minimum thresh- old is called the minimum support threshold, or minimum support (min sup), for short. By materializing only a fraction of the cells in a data cube, the result is seen as the “tip of the iceberg,” where the “iceberg” is the potential full cube including all cells. An iceberg cube can be speciﬁed with an SQL query, as shown in Example 5.3. 1Eq. (4.1) of Section 4.4.1 gives the total number of cuboids in a data cube where each dimension has an associated concept hierarchy. 5.1 Data Cube Computation: Preliminary Concepts 191 Example 5.3 Iceberg cube. compute cube sales iceberg as select month, city, customer group, count(*) from salesInfo cube by month, city, customer group having count(*) >= min sup The compute cube statement speciﬁes the precomputation of the iceberg cube, sales iceberg, with the dimensions month, city, and customer group, and the aggregate measure count(). The input tuples are in the salesInfo relation. The cube by clause speciﬁes that aggregates (group-by’s) are to be formed for each of the possible subsets of the given dimensions. If we were computing the full cube, each group-by would corre- spond to a cuboid in the data cube lattice. The constraint speciﬁed in the having clause is known as the iceberg condition. Here, the iceberg measure is count(). Note that the iceberg cube computed here could be used to answer group-by queries on any combina- tion of the speciﬁed dimensions of the form having count(*) >= v, where v ≥min sup. Instead of count(), the iceberg condition could specify more complex measures such as average(). If we were to omit the having clause, we would end up with the full cube. Let’s call this cube sales cube. The iceberg cube, sales iceberg, excludes all the cells of sales cube with a count that is less than min sup. Obviously, if we were to set the minimum support to 1 in sales iceberg, the resulting cube would be the full cube, sales cube. A naïve approach to computing an iceberg cube would be to ﬁrst compute the full cube and then prune the cells that do not satisfy the iceberg condition. However, this is still prohibitively expensive. An efﬁcient approach is to compute only the iceberg cube directly without computing the full cube. Sections 5.2.2 and 5.2.3 discuss methods for efﬁcient iceberg cube computation. Introducing iceberg cubes will lessen the burden of computing trivial aggregate cells in a data cube. However, we could still end up with a large number of uninteresting cells to compute. For example, suppose that there are 2 base cells for a database of 100 dimen- sions, denoted as {(a1, a2, a3,..., a100) : 10, (a1, a2, b3,..., b100) : 10}, where each has a cell count of 10. If the minimum support is set to 10, there will still be an impermis- sible number of cells to compute and store, although most of them are not interesting. For example, there are 2101 −6 distinct aggregate cells,2 like {(a1, a2, a3, a4,..., a99, ∗) : 10,..., (a1, a2, ∗, a4,..., a99, a100) : 10,..., (a1, a2, a3, ∗,..., ∗, ∗) : 10}, but most of them do not contain much new information. If we ignore all the aggregate cells that can be obtained by replacing some constants by ∗’s while keeping the same measure value, there are only three distinct cells left: {(a1, a2, a3,..., a100) : 10, (a1, a2, b3,..., b100) : 10, (a1, a2, ∗,..., ∗) : 20}. That is, out of 2101 −4 distinct base and aggregate cells, only three really offer valuable information. 2The proof is left as an exercise for the reader. 192 Chapter 5 Data Cube Technology (a1, a2, a3, ..., a100 ) : 10 (a1, a2, *, ..., *) : 20 (a1, a2, b3, ..., b100 ) : 10 Figure 5.2 Three closed cells forming the lattice of a closed cube. To systematically compress a data cube, we need to introduce the concept of closed coverage. A cell, c, is a closed cell if there exists no cell, d, such that d is a special- ization (descendant) of cell c (i.e., where d is obtained by replacing ∗in c with a non-∗value), and d has the same measure value as c. A closed cube is a data cube consisting of only closed cells. For example, the three cells derived in the preced- ing paragraph are the three closed cells of the data cube for the data set {(a1, a2, a3,..., a100) : 10, (a1, a2, b3,..., b100) : 10}. They form the lattice of a closed cube as shown in Figure 5.2. Other nonclosed cells can be derived from their corresponding closed cells in this lattice. For example, “(a1, ∗, ∗,..., ∗) : 20” can be derived from “(a1, a2, ∗,..., ∗) : 20” because the former is a generalized nonclosed cell of the latter. Similarly, we have “(a1, a2, b3, ∗,..., ∗) : 10.” Another strategy for partial materialization is to precompute only the cuboids involv- ing a small number of dimensions such as three to ﬁve. These cuboids form a cube shell for the corresponding data cube. Queries on additional combinations of the dimensions will have to be computed on-the-ﬂy. For example, we could compute all cuboids with three dimensions or less in an n-dimensional data cube, resulting in a cube shell of size 3. This, however, can still result in a large number of cuboids to compute, particularly when n is large. Alternatively, we can choose to precompute only portions or fragments of the cube shell based on cuboids of interest. Section 5.2.4 discusses a method for computing shell fragments and explores how they can be used for efﬁcient OLAP query processing. 5.1.2 General Strategies for Data Cube Computation There are several methods for efﬁcient data cube computation, based on the vari- ous kinds of cubes described in Section 5.1.1. In general, there are two basic data structures used for storing cuboids. The implementation of relational OLAP (ROLAP) uses relational tables, whereas multidimensional arrays are used in multidimensional OLAP (MOLAP). Although ROLAP and MOLAP may each explore different cube computation techniques, some optimization “tricks” can be shared among the different 5.1 Data Cube Computation: Preliminary Concepts 193 data representations. The following are general optimization techniques for efﬁcient computation of data cubes. Optimization Technique 1: Sorting, hashing, and grouping. Sorting, hashing, and grouping operations should be applied to the dimension attributes to reorder and cluster related tuples. In cube computation, aggregation is performed on the tuples (or cells) that share the same set of dimension values. Thus, it is important to explore sorting, hashing, and grouping operations to access and group such data together to facilitate compu- tation of such aggregates. To compute total sales by branch, day, and item, for example, it can be more efﬁcient to sort tuples or cells by branch, and then by day, and then group them according to the item name. Efﬁcient implementations of such operations in large data sets have been extensively studied in the database research community. Such implementations can be extended to data cube computation. This technique can also be further extended to perform shared-sorts (i.e., sharing sorting costs across multiple cuboids when sort-based methods are used), or to per- form shared-partitions (i.e., sharing the partitioning cost across multiple cuboids when hash-based algorithms are used). Optimization Technique 2: Simultaneous aggregation and caching of intermediate results. In cube computation, it is efﬁcient to compute higher-level aggregates from previously computed lower-level aggregates, rather than from the base fact table. Moreover, simultaneous aggregation from cached intermediate computation results may lead to the reduction of expensive disk input/output (I/O) operations. To compute sales by branch, for example, we can use the intermediate results derived from the computation of a lower-level cuboid such as sales by branch and day. This technique can be further extended to perform amortized scans (i.e., computing as many cuboids as possible at the same time to amortize disk reads). Optimization Technique 3: Aggregation from the smallest child when there exist mul- tiple child cuboids. When there exist multiple child cuboids, it is usually more efﬁcient to compute the desired parent (i.e., more generalized) cuboid from the smallest, previously computed child cuboid. To compute a sales cuboid, Cbranch, when there exist two previously computed cuboids, C{branch,year} and C{branch,item}, for example, it is obviously more efﬁcient to compute Cbranch from the former than from the latter if there are many more distinct items than distinct years. Many other optimization techniques may further improve computational efﬁciency. For example, string dimension attributes can be mapped to integers with values ranging from zero to the cardinality of the attribute. In iceberg cube computation the following optimization technique plays a particu- larly important role. 194 Chapter 5 Data Cube Technology Optimization Technique 4: The Apriori pruning method can be explored to compute iceberg cubes efﬁciently. The Apriori property,3 in the context of data cubes, states as follows: If a given cell does not satisfy minimum support, then no descen- dant of the cell (i.e., more specialized cell) will satisfy minimum support either. This property can be used to substantially reduce the computation of iceberg cubes. Recall that the speciﬁcation of iceberg cubes contains an iceberg condition, which is a constraint on the cells to be materialized. A common iceberg condition is that the cells must satisfy a minimum support