modularity of a clustering of a graph is the difference between the fraction of all edges that fall into individual clusters and the fraction that would do so if the graph vertices were randomly connected. The optimal clustering of graphs maximizes the modularity. Theoretically, many graph clustering problems can be regarded as ﬁnding good cuts, such as the sparsest cuts, on the graph. In practice, however, a number of challenges exist: High computational cost: Many graph cut problems are computationally expen- sive. The sparsest cut problem, for example, is NP-hard. Therefore, ﬁnding the optimal solutions on large graphs is often impossible. A good trade-off between efﬁciency/scalability and quality has to be achieved. Sophisticated graphs: Graphs can be more sophisticated than the ones described here, involving weights and/or cycles. High dimensionality: A graph can have many vertices. In a similarity matrix, a vertex is represented as a vector (a row in the matrix) with a dimensionality that is the number of vertices in the graph. Therefore, graph clustering methods must handle high dimensionality. Sparsity: A large graph is often sparse, meaning each vertex on average connects to only a small number of other vertices. A similarity matrix from a large sparse graph can also be sparse. There are two kinds of methods for clustering graph data, which address these challenges. One uses clustering methods for high-dimensional data, while the other is designed speciﬁcally for clustering graphs. The ﬁrst group of methods is based on generic clustering methods for high- dimensional data. They extract a similarity matrix from a graph using a similarity measure such as those discussed in Section 11.3.2. A generic clustering method can then be applied on the similarity matrix to discover clusters. Clustering methods for 11.3 Clustering Graph and Network Data 531 high-dimensional data are typically employed. For example, in many scenarios, once a similarity matrix is obtained, spectral clustering methods (Section 11.2.4) can be applied. Spectral clustering can approximate optimal graph cut solutions. For additional information, please refer to the bibliographic notes (Section 11.7). The second group of methods is speciﬁc to graphs. They search the graph to ﬁnd well-connected components as clusters. Let’s look at a method called SCAN (Structural Clustering Algorithm for Networks) as an example. Given an undirected graph, G = (V,E), for a vertex, u ∈V, the neighborhood of u is 0(u) = {v|(u,v) ∈E} ∪{u}. Using the idea of structural-context similarity, SCAN measures the similarity between two vertices, u,v ∈V, by the normalized common neighborhood size, that is, σ (u,v) = |0(u) ∩0(v)| √|0(u)||0(v)|. (11.40) The larger the value computed, the more similar the two vertices. SCAN uses a similarity threshold ε to deﬁne the cluster membership. For a vertex, u ∈V, the ε-neighborhood of u is deﬁned as Nε(u) = {v ∈0(u)|σ(u,v) ≥ε}. The ε-neighborhood of u contains all neighbors of u with a structural-context similarity to u that is at least ε. In SCAN, a core vertex is a vertex inside of a cluster. That is, u ∈V is a core ver- tex if |Nε(u)| ≥µ, where µ is a popularity threshold. SCAN grows clusters from core vertices. If a vertex v is in the ε-neighborhood of a core u, then v is assigned to the same cluster as u. This process of growing clusters continues until no cluster can be further grown. The process is similar to the density-based clustering method, DBSCAN (Chapter 10). Formally, a vertex v can be directly reached from a core u if v ∈Nε(u). Transitively, a vertex v can be reached from a core u if there exist vertices w1,...,wn such that w1 can be reached from u, wi can be reached from wi−1 for 1 < i ≤n, and v can be reached from wn. Moreover, two vertices, u,v ∈V, which may or may not be cores, are said to be connected if there exists a core w such that both u and v can be reached from w. All vertices in a cluster are connected. A cluster is a maximum set of vertices such that every pair in the set is connected. Some vertices may not belong to any cluster. Such a vertex u is a hub if the neighbor- hood 0(u) of u contains vertices from more than one cluster. If a vertex does not belong to any cluster, and is not a hub, it is an outlier. The SCAN algorithm is shown in Figure 11.15. The search framework closely resem- bles the cluster-ﬁnding process in DBSCAN. SCAN ﬁnds a cut of the graph, where each cluster is a set of vertices that are connected based on the transitive similarity in a structural context. An advantage of SCAN is that its time complexity is linear with respect to the number of edges. In very large and sparse graphs, the number of edges is in the same scale of the number of vertices. Therefore, SCAN is expected to have good scalability on clustering large graphs. 532 Chapter 11 Advanced Cluster Analysis Algorithm: SCAN for clusters on graph data. Input: a graph G = (V,E), a similarity threshold ε, and a population threshold µ Output: a set of clusters Method: set all vertices in V unlabeled for all unlabeled vertex u do if u is a core then generate a new cluster-id c insert all v ∈Nε(u) into a queue Q while Q ̸= do w ←the ﬁrst vertex in Q R ←the set of vertices that can be directly reached from w for all s ∈R do if s is not unlabeled or labeled as nonmember then assign the current cluster-id c to s endif if s is unlabeled then insert s into queue Q endif endfor remove w from Q end while else label u as nonmember endif endfor for all vertex u labeled nonmember do if ∃x,y ∈0(u) : x and y have different cluster-ids then label u as hub else label u as outlier endif endfor Figure 11.15 SCAN algorithm for cluster analysis on graph data. 11.4 Clustering with Constraints Users often have background knowledge that they want to integrate into cluster analysis. There may also be application-speciﬁc requirements. Such information can be mod- eled as clustering constraints. We approach the topic of clustering with constraints in two steps. Section 11.4.1 categorizes the types of constraints for clustering graph data. Methods for clustering with constraints are introduced in Section 11.4.2. 11.4 Clustering with Constraints 533 11.4.1 Categorization of Constraints This section studies how to categorize the constraints used in cluster analysis. Speciﬁ- cally, we can categorize constraints according to the subjects on which they are set, or on how strongly the constraints are to be enforced. As discussed in Chapter 10, cluster analysis involves three essential aspects: objects as instances of clusters, clusters as groups of objects, and the similarity among objects. Therefore, the ﬁrst method we discuss categorizes constraints according to what they are applied to. We thus have three types: constraints on instances, constraints on clusters, and constraints on similarity measurement. Constraints on instances: A constraint on instances speciﬁes how a pair or a set of instances should be grouped in the cluster analysis. Two common types of con- straints from this category include: Must-link constraints. If a must-link constraint is speciﬁed on two objects x and y, then x and y should be grouped into one cluster in the output of the cluster analysis. These must-link constraints are transitive. That is, if must-link(x,y) and must-link(y,z), then must-link(x,z). Cannot-link constraints. Cannot-link constraints are the opposite of must-link constraints. If a cannot-link constraint is speciﬁed on two objects, x and y, then in the output of the cluster analysis, x and y should belong to different clusters. Cannot-link constraints can be entailed. That is, if cannot-link(x,y), must-link(x,x′), and must-link(y,y′), then cannot-link(x′,y′). A constraint on instances can be deﬁned using speciﬁc instances. Alternatively, it can also be deﬁned using instance variables or attributes of instances. For example, a constraint, Constraint(x,y) : must-link(x,y) if dist(x,y) ≤ϵ, uses the distance between objects to specify a must-link constraint. Constraints on clusters: A constraint on clusters speciﬁes a requirement on the clusters, possibly using attributes of the clusters. For example, a constraint may specify the minimum number of objects in a cluster, the maximum diameter of a cluster, or the shape of a cluster (e.g., a convex). The number of clusters speciﬁed for partitioning clustering methods can be regarded as a constraint on clusters. Constraints on similarity measurement: Often, a similarity measure, such as Eucli- dean distance, is used to measure the similarity between objects in a cluster anal- ysis. In some applications, exceptions apply. A constraint on similarity measurement speciﬁes a requirement that the similarity calculation must respect. For example, to cluster people as moving objects in a plaza, while Euclidean distance is used to give 534 Chapter 11 Advanced Cluster Analysis the walking distance between two points, a constraint on similarity measurement is that the trajectory implementing the shortest distance cannot cross a wall. There can be more than one way to express a constraint, depending on the category. For example, we can specify a constraint on clusters as Constraint1: the diameter of a cluster cannot be larger than d. The requirement can also be expressed using a constraint on instances as Constraint′ 1: cannot-link(x,y) if dist(x,y) > d. (11.41) Example 11.22 Constraints on instances, clusters, and similarity measurement. AllElectronics clusters its customers so that each group of customers can be assigned to a customer relationship manager. Suppose we want to specify that all customers at the same address are to be placed in the same group, which would allow more comprehensive service to families. This can be expressed using a must-link constraint on instances: Constraintfamily(x,y) : must-link(x,y) if x.address = y.address. AllElectronics has eight customer relationship managers. To ensure that they each have a similar workload, we place a constraint on clusters such that there should be eight clusters, and each cluster should have at least 10% of the customers and no more than 15% of the customers. We can calculate the spatial distance between two customers using the driving distance between the two. However, if two customers live in different countries, we have to use the ﬂight distance instead. This is a constraint on similarity measurement. Another way to categorize clustering constraints considers how ﬁrmly the constraints have to be respected. A constraint is hard if a clustering that violates the constraint is unacceptable. A constraint is soft if a clustering that violates the constraint is not preferable but acceptable when no better solution can be found. Soft constraints are also called preferences. Example 11.23 Hard and soft constraints. For AllElectronics, Constraintfamily in Example 11.22 is a hard constraint because splitting a family into different clusters could prevent the company from providing comprehensive services to the family, leading to poor customer satisfac- tion. The constraint on the number of clusters (which corresponds to the number of customer relationship managers in the company) is also hard. Example 11.22 also has a constraint to balance the size of clusters. While satisfying this constraint is strongly preferred, the company is ﬂexible in that it is willing to assign a senior and more capa- ble customer relationship manager to oversee a larger cluster. Therefore, the constraint is soft. Ideally, for a speciﬁc data set and a set of constraints, all clusterings satisfy the con- straints. However, it is possible that there may be no clustering of the data set that 11.4 Clustering with Constraints 535 satisﬁes all the constraints. Trivially, if two constraints in the set conﬂict, then no clustering can satisfy them at the same time. Example 11.24 Conﬂicting constraints. Consider these constraints: must-link(x,y) if dist(x,y) < 5 cannot-link(x,y) if dist(x,y) > 3. If a data set has two objects, x,y, such that dist(x,y) = 4, then no clustering can satisfy both constraints simultaneously. Consider these two constraints: must-link(x,y) if dist(x,y) < 5 must-link(x,y) if dist(x,y) < 3. The second constraint is redundant given the ﬁrst. Moreover, for a data set where the distance between any two objects is at least 5, every possible clustering of the objects satisﬁes the constraints. “How can we measure the quality and the usefulness of a set of constraints?” In gene- ral, we consider either their informativeness, or their coherence. The informativeness is the amount of information carried by the constraints that is beyond the clustering model. Given a data set, D, a clustering method, A, and a set of constraints, C, the informativeness of C with respect to A on D can be measured by the fraction of con- straints in C that are unsatisﬁed by the clustering computed by A on D. The higher the informativeness, the more speciﬁc the requirements and background knowledge that the constraints carry. The coherence of a set of constraints is the degree of agreement among the constraints themselves, which can be measured by the redundancy among the constraints. 11.4.2 Methods for Clustering with Constraints Although we can categorize clustering constraints, applications may have very different constraints of speciﬁc forms. Consequently, various techniques are needed to handle speciﬁc constraints. In this section, we discuss the general principles of handling hard and soft constraints. Handling Hard Constraints A general strategy for handling hard constraints is to strictly respect the constraints in the cluster assignment process. To illustrate this idea, we will use partitioning clustering as an example. 536 Chapter 11 Advanced Cluster Analysis Given a data set and a set of constraints on instances (i.e., must-link or cannot-link constraints), how can we extend the k-means method to satisfy such constraints? The COP-k-means algorithm works as follows: 1. Generate superinstances for must-link constraints. Compute the transitive clo- sure of the must-link constraints. Here, all must-link constraints are treated as an equivalence relation. The closure gives one or multiple subsets of objects where all objects in a subset must be assigned to one cluster. To represent such a subset, we replace all those objects in the subset by the mean. The superinstance also carries a weight, which is the number of objects it represents. After this step, the must-link constraints are always satisﬁed. 2. Conduct modiﬁed k-means clustering. Recall that, in k-means, an object is assigned to the closest center. What if a nearest-center assignment violates a cannot-link con- straint? To respect cannot-link constraints, we modify the center assignment process in k-means to a nearest feasible center assignment. That is, when the objects are assigned to centers in sequence, at each step we make sure the assignments so far do not violate any cannot-link constraints. An object is assigned to the nearest center so that the assignment respects all cannot-link constraints. Because COP-k-means ensures that no constraints are violated at every step, it does not require any backtracking. It is a greedy algorithm for generating a clustering that satisﬁes all constraints, provided that no conﬂicts exist among the constraints. Handling Soft Constraints Clustering with soft constraints is an optimization problem. When a clustering violates a soft constraint, a penalty is imposed on the clustering. Therefore, the optimization goal of the clustering contains two parts: optimizing the clustering quality and minimizing the constraint violation penalty. The overall objective function is a combination of the clustering quality score and the penalty score. To illustrate, we again use partitioning clustering as an example. Given a data set and a set of soft constraints on instances, the CVQE (Constrained Vector Quanti- zation Error) algorithm conducts k-means clustering while enforcing constraint vio- lation penalties. The objective function used in CVQE is the sum of the distance used in k-means, adjusted by the constraint violation penalties, which are calculated as follows. Penalty of a must-link violation. If there is a must-link constraint on objects x and y, but they are assigned to two different centers, c1 and c2, respectively, then the con- straint is violated. As a result, dist(c1,c2), the distance between c1 and c2, is added to the objective function as the penalty. Penalty of a cannot-link violation. If there is a cannot-link constraint on objects x and y, but they are assigned to a common center, c, then the constraint is violated. 11.4 Clustering with Constraints 537 The distance, dist(c,c′), between c and c′ is added to the objective function as the penalty. Speeding up Constrained Clustering Constraints, such as on similarity measurements, can lead to heavy costs in cluster- ing. Consider the following clustering with obstacles problem: To cluster people as moving objects in a plaza, Euclidean distance is used to measure the walking distance between two points. However, a constraint on similarity measurement is that the tra- jectory implementing the shortest distance cannot cross a wall (Section 11.4.1). Because obstacles may occur between objects, the distance between two objects may have to be derived by geometric computations (e.g., involving triangulation). The computational cost is high if a large number of objects and obstacles are involved. The clustering with obstacles problem can be represented using a graphical notation. First, a point, p, is visible from another point, q, in the region R if the straight line joining p and q does not intersect any obstacles. A visibility graph is the graph, VG = (V,E), such that each vertex of the obstacles has a corresponding node in V and two nodes, v1 and v2, in V are joined by an edge in E if and only if the corresponding vertices they represent are visible to each other. Let VG′ = (V ′,E′) be a visibility graph created from VG by adding two additional points, p and q, in V ′. E′ contains an edge joining two points in V ′ if the two points are mutually visible. The shortest path between two points, p and q, will be a subpath of VG′, as shown in Figure 11.16(a). We see that it begins with an edge from p to either v1, v2, or v3, goes through a path in VG, and then ends with an edge from either v4 or v5 to q. To reduce the cost of distance computation between any two pairs of objects or points, several preprocessing and optimization techniques can be used. One method groups points that are close together into microclusters. This can be done by ﬁrst tri- angulating the region R into triangles, and then grouping nearby points in the same triangle into microclusters, using a method similar to BIRCH or DBSCAN, as shown in Figure 11.16(b). By processing microclusters rather than individual points, the over- all computation is reduced. After that, precomputation can be performed to build two (b) p q VG VG' (a) v3 v5 v2 v1 v4 o1 o2 Figure 11.16 Clustering with obstacle objects (o1 and o2): (a) a visibility graph and (b) triangulation of regions with microclusters. Source: Adapted from Tung, Hou, and Han [THH01]. 538 Chapter 11 Advanced Cluster Analysis kinds of join indices based on the computation of the shortest paths: (1) VV indices, for any pair of obstacle vertices, and (2) MV indices, for any pair of microcluster and obstacle vertex. Use of the indices helps further optimize the overall performance. Using such precomputation and optimization strategies, the distance between any two points (at the granularity level of a microcluster) can be computed efﬁciently. Thus, the clustering process can be performed in a manner similar to a typical efﬁcient k-medoids algorithm, such as CLARANS, and achieve good clustering quality for large data sets. 11.5 Summary In conventional cluster analysis, an object is assigned to one cluster exclusively. How- ever, in some applications, there is a need to assign an object to one or more clusters in a fuzzy or probabilistic way. Fuzzy clustering and probabilistic model-based clus- tering allow an object to belong to one or more clusters. A partition matrix records the membership degree of objects belonging to clusters. Probabilistic model-based clustering assumes that a cluster is a parameterized dis- tribution. Using the data to be clustered as the observed samples, we can estimate the parameters of the clusters. A mixture model assumes that a set of observed objects is a mixture of instances from multiple probabilistic clusters. Conceptually, each observed object is generated inde- pendently by ﬁrst choosing a probabilistic cluster according to the probabilities of the clusters, and then choosing a sample according to the probability density function of the chosen cluster. An expectation-maximization algorithm is a framework for approaching maximum likelihood or maximum a posteriori estimates of parameters in statistical models. Expectation-maximization algorithms can be used to compute fuzzy clustering and probabilistic model-based clustering. High-dimensional data pose several challenges for cluster analysis, including how to model high-dimensional clusters and how to search for such clusters. There are two major categories of clustering methods for high-dimensional data: subspace clustering methods and dimensionality reduction methods. Subspace clustering methods search for clusters in subspaces of the original space. Exam- ples include subspace search methods, correlation-based clustering methods, and biclustering methods. Dimensionality reduction methods create a new space of lower dimensionality and search for clusters there. Biclustering methods cluster objects and attributes simultaneously. Types of biclus- ters include biclusters with constant values, constant values on rows/columns, coherent values, and coherent evolutions on rows/columns. Two major types of biclustering methods are optimization-based methods and enumeration methods. 11.6 Exercises 539 Spectral clustering is a dimensionality reduction method. The general idea is to construct new dimensions using an afﬁnity matrix. Clustering graph and network data has many applications such as social network analysis. Challenges include how to measure the similarity between objects in a graph, and how to design clustering models and methods for graph and network data. Geodesic distance is the number of edges between two vertices on a graph. It can be used to measure similarity. Alternatively, similarity in graphs, such as social networks, can be measured using structural context and random walk. SimRank is a similarity measure that is based on both structural context and random walk. Graph clustering can be modeled as computing graph cuts. A sparsest cut may lead to a good clustering, while modularity can be used to measure the clustering quality. SCAN is a graph clustering algorithm that searches graphs to identify well-connected components as clusters. Constraints can be used to express application-speciﬁc requirements or background knowledge for cluster analysis. Constraints for clustering can be categorized as con- straints on instances, on clusters, or on similarity measurement. Constraints on instances include must-link and cannot-link constraints. A constraint can be hard or soft. Hard constraints for clustering can be enforced by strictly respecting the constraints in the cluster assignment process. Clustering with soft constraints can be considered an optimization problem. Heuristics can be used to speed up constrained clustering. 11.6 Exercises 11.1 Traditional clustering methods are rigid in that they require each object to belong exclu- sively to only one cluster. Explain why this is a special case of fuzzy clustering. You may use k-means as an example. 11.2 AllElectronics carries 1000 products, P1, ..., P1000. Consider customers Ada, Bob, and Cathy such that Ada and Bob purchase three products in common, P1,P2, and P3. For the other 997 products, Ada and Bob independently purchase seven of them randomly. Cathy purchases 10 products, randomly selected from the 1000 products. In Euclidean distance, what is the probability that dist(Ada,Bob) > dist(Ada,Cathy)? What if Jaccard similarity (Chapter 2) is used? What can you learn from this example? 11.3 Show that I × J is a bicluster with coherent values if and only if, for any i1,i2 ∈I and j1,j2 ∈J, ei1j1 −ei2j1 = ei1j2 −ei2j2. 11.4 Compare the MaPle algorithm (Section 11.2.3) with the frequent closed itemset mining algorithm, CLOSET (Pei, Han, and Mao [PHM00]). What are the major similarities and differences? 540 Chapter 11 Advanced Cluster Analysis 11.5 SimRank is a similarity measure for clustering graph and network data. (a) Prove lim i→∞si(u,v) = s(u,v) for SimRank computation. (b) Show s(u,v) = p(u,v) for SimRank. 11.6 In a large sparse graph where on average each node has a low degree, is the similarity matrix using SimRank still sparse? If so, in what sense? If not, why? Deliberate on your answer. 11.7 Compare the SCAN algorithm (Section 11.3.3) with DBSCAN (Section 10.4.1). What are their similarities and differences? 11.8 Consider partitioning clustering and the following constraint on clusters: The number of objects in each cluster must be between n k (1 −δ) and n k (1 + δ), where n is the total number of objects in the data set, k is the number of clusters desired, and δ in [0,1) is a parameter. Can you extend the k-means method to handle this constraint? Discuss situations where the constraint is hard and soft. 11.7 Bibliographic Notes H¨oppner Klawonn, Kruse, and Runkler [HKKR99] provide a thorough discussion of fuzzy clustering. The fuzzy c-means algorithm (on which Example 11.7 is based) was proposed by Bezdek [Bez81]. Fraley and Raftery [FR02] give a comprehensive overview of model-based cluster analysis and probabilistic models. McLachlan and Basford [MB88] present a systematic introduction to mixture models and applications in cluster analysis. Dempster, Laird, and Rubin [DLR77] are recognized as the ﬁrst to introduce the EM algorithm and give it its name. However, the idea of the EM algorithm had been “pro- posed many times in special circumstances” before, as admitted in Dempster, Laird, and Rubin [DLR77]. Wu [Wu83] gives the correct analysis of the EM algorithm. Mixture models and EM algorithms are used extensively in many data mining appli- cations. Introductions to model-based clustering, mixture models, and EM algorithms can be found in recent textbooks on machine learning and statistical learning—for example, Bishop [Bis06], Marsland [Mar09], and Alpaydin [Alp11]. The increase of dimensionality has severe effects on distance functions, as indicated by Beyer et al. [BGRS99]. It also has had a dramatic impact on various techniques for classiﬁcation, clustering, and semisupervised learning (Radovanovi´c, Nanopoulos, and Ivanovi´c [RNI09]). Kriegel, Kr¨oger, and Zimek [KKZ09] present a comprehensive survey on methods for clustering high-dimensional data. The CLIQUE algorithm was developed by Agrawal, Gehrke, Gunopulos, and Raghavan [AGGR98]. The PROCLUS algorithm was proposed by Aggawal, Procopiuc, Wolf, et al. [APW+99]. The technique of biclustering was initially proposed by Hartigan [Har72]. The term biclustering was coined by Mirkin [Mir98]. Cheng and Church [CC00] introduced 11.7 Bibliographic Notes 541 biclustering into gene expression data analysis. There are many studies on biclustering models and methods. The notion of δ-pCluster was introduced by Wang, Wang, Yang, and Yu [WWYY02]. For informative surveys, see Madeira and Oliveira [MO04] and Tanay, Sharan, and Shamir [TSS04]. In this chapter, we introduced the δ-cluster algo- rithm by Cheng and Church [CC00] and MaPle by Pei, Zhang, Cho, et al. [PZC+03] as examples of optimization-based methods and enumeration methods for biclustering, respectively. Donath and Hoffman [DH73] and Fiedler [Fie73] pioneered spectral clustering. In this chapter, we use an algorithm proposed by Ng, Jordan, and Weiss [NJW01] as an example. For a thorough tutorial on spectral clustering, see Luxburg [Lux07]. Clustering graph and network data is an important and fast-growing topic. Schaeffer [Sch07] provides a survey. The SimRank measure of similarity was developed by Jeh and Widom [JW02a]. Xu et al. [XYFS07] proposed the SCAN algorithm. Arora, Rao, and Vazirani [ARV09] discuss the sparsest cuts and approximation algorithms. Clustering with constraints has been extensively studied. Davidson, Wagstaff, and Basu [DWB06] proposed the measures of informativeness and coherence. The COP- k-means algorithm is given by Wagstaff et al. [WCRS01]. The CVQE algorithm was proposed by Davidson and Ravi [DR05]. Tung, Han, Lakshmanan, and Ng [THLN01] presented a framework for constraint-based clustering based on user-speciﬁed con- straints. An efﬁcient method for constraint-based spatial clustering in the existence of physical obstacle constraints was proposed by Tung, Hou, and Han [THH01]. This page intentionally left blank 12 Outlier Detection Imagine that you are a transaction auditor in a credit card company. To protect your customers from credit card fraud, you pay special attention to card usages that are rather different from typical cases. For example, if a purchase amount is much bigger than usual for a card owner, and if the purchase occurs far from the owner’s resident city, then the purchase is suspicious. You want to detect such transactions as soon as they occur and contact the card owner for veriﬁcation. This is common practice in many credit card companies. What data mining techniques can help detect suspicious transactions? Most credit card transactions are normal. However, if a credit card is stolen, its transaction pattern usually changes dramatically—the locations of purchases and the items purchased are often very different from those of the authentic card owner and other customers. An essential idea behind credit card fraud detection is to identify those transactions that are very different from the norm. Outlier detection (also known as anomaly detection) is the process of ﬁnding data objects with behaviors that are very different from expectation. Such objects are called outliers or anomalies. Outlier detection is important in many applications in addition to fraud detection such as medical care, public safety and security, industry damage detection, image processing, sensor/video network surveillance, and intrusion detection. Outlier detection and clustering analysis are two highly related tasks. Clustering ﬁnds the majority patterns in a data set and organizes the data accordingly, whereas out- lier detection tries to capture those exceptional cases that deviate substantially from the majority patterns. Outlier detection and clustering analysis serve different purposes. In this chapter, we study outlier detection techniques. Section 12.1 deﬁnes the differ- ent types of outliers. Section 12.2 presents an overview of outlier detection methods. In the rest of the chapter, you will learn about outlier detection methods in detail. These approaches, organized here by category, are statistical (Section 12.3), proximity-based (Section 12.4), clustering-based (Section 12.5), and classiﬁcation-based (Section 12.6). In addition, you will learn about mining contextual and collective outliers (Section 12.7) and outlier detection in high-dimensional data (Section 12.8). c⃝2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques 543 544 Chapter 12 Outlier Detection 12.1 Outliers and Outlier Analysis Let us ﬁrst deﬁne what outliers are, categorize the different types of outliers, and then discuss the challenges in outlier detection at a general level. 12.1.1 What Are Outliers? Assume that a given statistical process is used to generate a set of data objects. An outlier is a data object that deviates signiﬁcantly from the rest of the objects, as if it were gen- erated by a different mechanism. For ease of presentation within this chapter, we may refer to data objects that are not outliers as “normal” or expected data. Similarly, we may refer to outliers as “abnormal” data. Example 12.1 Outliers. In Figure 12.1, most objects follow a roughly Gaussian distribution. However, the objects in region R are signiﬁcantly different. It is unlikely that they follow the same distribution as the other objects in the data set. Thus, the objects in R are outliers in the data set. Outliers are different from noisy data. As mentioned in Chapter 3, noise is a ran- dom error or variance in a measured variable. In general, noise is not interesting in data analysis, including outlier detection. For example, in credit card fraud detection, a customer’s purchase behavior can be modeled as a random variable. A customer may generate some “noise transactions” that may seem like “random errors” or “variance,” such as by buying a bigger lunch one day, or having one more cup of coffee than usual. Such transactions should not be treated as outliers; otherwise, the credit card company would incur heavy costs from verifying that many transactions. The company may also lose customers by bothering them with multiple false alarms. As in many other data analysis and data mining tasks, noise should be removed before outlier detection. Outliers are interesting because they are suspected of not being generated by the same mechanisms as the rest of the data. Therefore, in outlier detection, it is important to R Figure 12.1 The objects in region R are outliers. 12.1 Outliers and Outlier Analysis 545 justify why the outliers detected are generated by some other mechanisms. This is often achieved by making various assumptions on the rest of the data and showing that the outliers detected violate those assumptions signiﬁcantly. Outlier detection is also related to novelty detection in evolving data sets. For example, by monitoring a social media web site where new content is incoming, novelty detection may identify new topics and trends in a timely manner. Novel topics may initially appear as outliers. To this extent, outlier detection and novelty detection share some similarity in modeling and detection methods. However, a critical difference between the two is that in novelty detection, once new topics are conﬁrmed, they are usually incorporated into the model of normal behavior so that follow-up instances are not treated as outliers anymore. 12.1.2 Types of Outliers In general, outliers can be classiﬁed into three categories, namely global outliers, con- textual (or conditional) outliers, and collective outliers. Let’s examine each of these categories. Global Outliers In a given data set, a data object is a global outlier if it deviates signiﬁcantly from the rest of the data set. Global outliers are sometimes called point anomalies, and are the simplest type of outliers. Most outlier detection methods are aimed at ﬁnding global outliers. Example 12.2 Global outliers. Consider the points in Figure 12.1 again. The points in region R signiﬁ- cantly deviate from the rest of the data set, and hence are examples of global outliers. To detect global outliers, a critical issue is to ﬁnd an appropriate measurement of deviation with respect to the application in question. Various measurements are pro- posed, and, based on these, outlier detection methods are partitioned into different categories. We will come to this issue in detail later. Global outlier detection is important in many applications. Consider intrusion detec- tion in computer networks, for example. If the communication behavior of a computer is very different from the normal patterns (e.g., a large number of packages is broad- cast in a short time), this behavior may be considered as a global outlier and the corresponding computer is a suspected victim of hacking. As another example, in trad- ing transaction auditing systems, transactions that do not follow the regulations are considered as global outliers and should be held for further examination. Contextual Outliers “The temperature today is 28◦C. Is it exceptional (i.e., an outlier)?” It depends, for exam- ple, on the time and location! If it is in winter in Toronto, yes, it is an outlier. If it is a summer day in Toronto, then it is normal. Unlike global outlier detection, in this case, 546 Chapter 12 Outlier Detection whether or not today’s temperature value is an outlier depends on the context—the date, the location, and possibly some other factors. In a given data set, a data object is a contextual outlier if it deviates signiﬁcantly with respect to a speciﬁc context of the object. Contextual outliers are also known as conditional outliers because they are conditional on the selected context. Therefore, in contextual outlier detection, the context has to be speciﬁed as part of the problem deﬁ- nition. Generally, in contextual outlier detection, the attributes of the data objects in question are divided into two groups: Contextual attributes: The contextual attributes of a data object deﬁne the object’s context. In the temperature example, the contextual attributes may be date and location. Behavioral attributes: These deﬁne the object’s characteristics, and are used to eval- uate whether the object is an outlier in the context to which it belongs. In the temperature example, the behavioral attributes may be the temperature, humidity, and pressure. Unlike global outlier detection, in contextual outlier detection, whether a data object is an outlier depends on not only the behavioral attributes but also the contextual attributes. A conﬁguration of behavioral attribute values may be considered an outlier in one context (e.g., 28◦C is an outlier for a Toronto winter), but not an outlier in another context (e.g., 28◦C is not an outlier for a Toronto summer). Contextual outliers are a generalization of local outliers, a notion introduced in density-based outlier analysis approaches. An object in a data set is a local outlier if its density signiﬁcantly deviates from the local area in which it occurs. We will discuss local outlier analysis in greater detail in Section 12.4.3. Global outlier detection can be regarded as a special case of contextual outlier detec- tion where the set of contextual attributes is empty. In other words, global outlier detection uses the whole data set as the context. Contextual outlier analysis provides ﬂexibility to users in that one can examine outliers in different contexts, which can be highly desirable in many applications. Example 12.3 Contextual outliers. In credit card fraud detection, in addition to global outliers, an analyst may consider outliers in different contexts. Consider customers who use more than 90% of their credit limit. If one such customer is viewed as belonging to a group of customers with low credit limits, then such behavior may not be considered an outlier. However, similar behavior of customers from a high-income group may be considered outliers if their balance often exceeds their credit limit. Such outliers may lead to busi- ness opportunities—raising credit limits for such customers can bring in new revenue. 12.1 Outliers and Outlier Analysis 547 The quality of contextual outlier detection in an application depends on the meaningfulness of the contextual attributes, in addition to the measurement of the devi- ation of an object to the majority in the space of behavioral attributes. More often than not, the contextual attributes should be determined by domain experts, which can be regarded as part of the input background knowledge. In many applications, nei- ther obtaining sufﬁcient information to determine contextual attributes nor collecting high-quality contextual attribute data is easy. “How can we formulate meaningful contexts in contextual outlier detection?” A straightforward method simply uses group-bys of the contextual attributes as contexts. This may not be effective, however, because many group-bys may have insufﬁcient data and/or noise. A more general method uses the proximity of data objects in the space of contextual attributes. We discuss this approach in detail in Section 12.4. Collective Outliers Suppose you are a supply-chain manager of AllElectronics. You handle thousands of orders and shipments every day. If the shipment of an order is delayed, it may not be considered an outlier because, statistically, delays occur from time to time. However, you have to pay attention if 100 orders are delayed on a single day. Those 100 orders as a whole form an outlier, although each of them may not be regarded as an outlier if considered individually. You may have to take a close look at those orders collectively to understand the shipment problem. Given a data set, a subset of data objects forms a collective outlier if the objects as a whole deviate signiﬁcantly from the entire data set. Importantly, the individual data objects may not be outliers. Example 12.4 Collective outliers. In Figure 12.2, the black objects as a whole form a collective outlier because the density of those objects is much higher than the rest in the data set. However, every black object individually is not an outlier with respect to the whole data set. Figure 12.2 The black objects form a collective outlier. 548 Chapter 12 Outlier Detection Collective outlier detection has many important applications. For example, in intrusion detection, a denial-of-service package from one computer to another is con- sidered normal, and not an outlier at all. However, if several computers keep sending denial-of-service packages to each other, they as a whole should be considered as a col- lective outlier. The computers involved may be suspected of being compromised by an attack. As another example, a stock transaction between two parties is considered nor- mal. However, a large set of transactions of the same stock among a small party in a short period are collective outliers because they may be evidence of some people manipulating the market. Unlike global or contextual outlier detection, in collective outlier detection we have to consider not only the behavior of individual objects, but also that of groups of objects. Therefore, to detect collective outliers, we need background knowledge of the relationship among data objects such as distance or similarity measurements between objects. In summary, a data set can have multiple types of outliers. Moreover, an object may belong to more than one type of outlier. In business, different outliers may be used in various applications or for different purposes. Global outlier detection is the simplest. Context outlier detection requires background information to determine contextual attributes and contexts. Collective outlier detection requires background information to model the relationship among objects to ﬁnd groups of outliers. 12.1.3 Challenges of Outlier Detection Outlier detection is useful in many applications yet faces many challenges such as the following: Modeling normal objects and outliers effectively. Outlier detection quality highly depends on the modeling of normal (nonoutlier) objects and outliers. Often, build- ing a comprehensive model for data normality is very challenging, if not impossible. This is partly because it is hard to enumerate all possible normal behaviors in an application. The border between data normality and abnormality (outliers) is often not clear cut. Instead, there can be a wide range of gray area. Consequently, while some out- lier detection methods assign to each object in the input data set a label of either “normal” or “outlier,” other methods assign to each object a score measuring the “outlier-ness” of the object. Application-speciﬁc outlier detection. Technically, choosing the similarity/distance measure and the relationship model to describe data objects is critical in outlier detection. Unfortunately, such choices are often application-dependent. Different applications may have very different requirements. For example, in clinic data anal- ysis, a small deviation may be important enough to justify an outlier. In contrast, in marketing analysis, objects are often subject to larger ﬂuctuations, and consequently a substantially larger deviation is needed to justify an outlier. Outlier detection’s high 12.2 Outlier Detection Methods 549 dependency on the application type makes it impossible to develop a universally applicable outlier detection method. Instead, individual outlier detection methods that are dedicated to speciﬁc applications must be developed. Handling noise in outlier detection. As mentioned earlier, outliers are different from noise. It is also well known that the quality of real data sets tends to be poor. Noise often unavoidably exists in data collected in many applications. Noise may be present as deviations in attribute values or even as missing values. Low data quality and the presence of noise bring a huge challenge to outlier detection. They can distort the data, blurring the distinction between normal objects and outliers. Moreover, noise and missing data may “hide” outliers and reduce the effectiveness of out- lier detection—an outlier may appear “disguised” as a noise point, and an outlier detection method may mistakenly identify a noise point as an outlier. Understandability. In some application scenarios, a user may want to not only detect outliers, but also understand why the detected objects are outliers. To meet the understandability requirement, an outlier detection method has to provide some justiﬁcation of the detection. For example, a statistical method can be used to jus- tify the degree to which an object may be an outlier based on the likelihood that the object was generated by the same mechanism that generated the majority of the data. The smaller the likelihood, the more unlikely the object was generated by the same mechanism, and the more likely the object is an outlier. The rest of this chapter discusses approaches to outlier detection. 12.2 Outlier Detection Methods There are many outlier detection methods in the literature and in practice. Here, we present two orthogonal ways to categorize outlier detection methods. First, we catego- rize outlier detection methods according to whether the sample of data for analysis is given with domain expert–provided labels that can be used to build an outlier detection model. Second, we divide methods into groups according to their assumptions regarding normal objects versus outliers. 12.2.1 Supervised, Semi-Supervised, and Unsupervised Methods If expert-labeled examples of normal and/or outlier objects can be obtained, they can be used to build outlier detection models. The methods used can be divided into supervised methods, semi-supervised methods, and unsupervised methods. Supervised Methods Supervised methods model data normality and abnormality. Domain experts examine and label a sample of the underlying data. Outlier detection can then be modeled as 550 Chapter 12 Outlier Detection a classiﬁcation problem (Chapters 8 and 9). The task is to learn a classiﬁer that can recognize outliers. The sample is used for training and testing. In some applications, the experts may label just the normal objects, and any other objects not matching the model of normal objects are reported as outliers. Other methods model the outliers and treat objects not matching the model of outliers as normal. Although many classiﬁcation methods can be applied, challenges to supervised outlier detection include the following: The two classes (i.e., normal objects versus outliers) are imbalanced. That is, the pop- ulation of outliers is typically much smaller than that of normal objects. Therefore, methods for handling imbalanced classes (Section 8.6.5) may be used, such as over- sampling (i.e., replicating) outliers to increase their distribution in the training set used to construct the classiﬁer. Due to the small population of outliers in data, the sample data examined by domain experts and used in training may not even sufﬁ- ciently represent the outlier distribution. The lack of outlier samples can limit the capability of classiﬁers built as such. To tackle these problems, some methods “make up” artiﬁcial outliers. In many outlier detection applications, catching as many outliers as possible (i.e., the sensitivity or recall of outlier detection) is far more important than not mislabeling normal objects as outliers. Consequently, when a classiﬁcation method is used for supervised outlier detection, it has to be interpreted appropriately so as to consider the application interest on recall. In summary, supervised methods of outlier detection must be careful in how they train and how they interpret classiﬁcation rates due to the fact that outliers are rare in comparison to the other data samples. Unsupervised Methods In some application scenarios, objects labeled as “normal” or “outlier” are not available. Thus, an unsupervised learning method has to be used. Unsupervised outlier detection methods make an implicit assumption: The normal objects are somewhat “clustered.” In other words, an unsupervised outlier detection method expects that normal objects follow a pattern far more frequently than outliers. Normal objects do not have to fall into one group sharing high similarity. Instead, they can form multiple groups, where each group has distinct features. However, an outlier is expected to occur far away in feature space from any of those groups of normal objects. This assumption may not be true all the time. For example, in Figure 12.2, the normal objects do not share any strong patterns. Instead, they are uniformly distributed. The collective outliers, however, share high similarity in a small area. Unsupervised methods cannot detect such outliers effectively. In some applications, normal objects are diversely distributed, and many such objects do not follow strong patterns. For instance, in some intrusion detection and computer virus detection problems, normal activities are very diverse and many do not fall into high-quality clusters. In such scenarios, unsupervised 12.2 Outlier Detection Methods 551 methods may have a high false positive rate—they may mislabel many normal objects as outliers (intrusions or viruses in these applications), and let many actual outliers go undetected. Due to the high similarity between intrusions and viruses (i.e., they have to attack key resources in the target systems), modeling outliers using supervised methods may be far more effective. Many clustering methods can be adapted to act as unsupervised outlier detection methods. The central idea is to ﬁnd clusters ﬁrst, and then the data objects not belong- ing to any cluster are detected as outliers. However, such methods suffer from two issues. First, a data object not belonging to any cluster may be noise instead of an outlier. Sec- ond, it is often costly to ﬁnd clusters ﬁrst and then ﬁnd outliers. It is usually assumed that there are far fewer outliers than normal objects. Having to process a large popu- lation of nontarget data entries (i.e., the normal objects) before one can touch the real meat (i.e., the outliers) can be unappealing. The latest unsupervised outlier detection methods develop various smart ideas to tackle outliers directly without explicitly and completely ﬁnding clusters. You will learn more about these techniques in Sections 12.4 and 12.5 on proximity-based and clustering-based methods, respectively. Semi-Supervised Methods In many applications, although obtaining some labeled examples is feasible, the number of such labeled examples is often small. We may encounter cases where only a small set of the normal and/or outlier objects are labeled, but most of the data are unlabeled. Semi-supervised outlier detection methods were developed to tackle such scenarios. Semi-supervised outlier detection methods can be regarded as applications of semi- supervised learning methods (Section 9.7.2). For example, when some labeled normal objects are available, we can use them, together with unlabeled objects that are close by, to train a model for normal objects. The model of normal objects then can be used to detect outliers—those objects not ﬁtting the model of normal objects are classiﬁed as outliers. If only some labeled outliers are available, semi-supervised outlier detection is trick- ier. A small number of labeled outliers are unlikely to represent all the possible outliers. Therefore, building a model for outliers based on only a few labeled outliers is unlikely to be effective. To improve the quality of outlier detection, we can get help from models for normal objects learned from unsupervised methods. For additional information on semi-supervised methods, interested readers are referred to the bibliographic notes at the end of this chapter (Section 12.11). 12.2.2 Statistical Methods, Proximity-Based Methods, and Clustering-Based Methods As discussed in Section 12.1, outlier detection methods make assumptions about outliers versus the rest of the data. According to the assumptions made, we can categorize outlier detection methods into three types: statistical methods, proximity-based methods, and clustering-based methods. 552 Chapter 12 Outlier Detection Statistical Methods Statistical methods (also known as model-based methods) make assumptions of data normality. They assume that normal data objects are generated by a statistical (stochastic) model, and that data not following the model are outliers. Example 12.5 Detecting outliers using a statistical (Gaussian) model. In Figure 12.1, the data points except for those in region R ﬁt a Gaussian distribution gD, where for a location x in the data space, gD(x) gives the probability density at x. Thus, the Gaussian distribution gD can be used to model the normal data, that is, most of the data points in the data set. For each object y in region, R, we can estimate gD(y), the probability that this point ﬁts the Gaussian distribution. Because gD( y) is very low, y is unlikely generated by the Gaussian model, and thus is an outlier. The effectiveness of statistical methods highly depends on whether the assumptions made for the statistical model hold true for the given data. There are many kinds of statistical models. For example, the statistic models used in the methods may be para- metric or nonparametric. Statistical methods for outlier detection are discussed in detail in Section 12.3. Proximity-Based Methods Proximity-based methods assume that an object is an outlier if the nearest neighbors of the object are far away in feature space, that is, the proximity of the object to its neighbors signiﬁcantly deviates from the proximity of most of the other objects to their neighbors in the same data set. Example 12.6 Detecting outliers using proximity. Consider the objects in Figure 12.1 again. If we model the proximity of an object using its three nearest neighbors, then the objects in region R are substantially different from other objects in the data set. For the two objects in R, their second and third nearest neighbors are dramatically more remote than those of any other objects. Therefore, we can label the objects in R as outliers based on proximity. The effectiveness of proximity-based methods relies heavily on the proximity (or dis- tance) measure used. In some applications, such measures cannot be easily obtained. Moreover, proximity-based methods often have difﬁculty in detecting a group of outliers if the outliers are close to one another. There are two major types of proximity-based outlier detection, namely distance- based and density-based outlier detection. Proximity-based outlier detection is discussed in Section 12.4. Clustering-Based Methods Clustering-based methods assume that the normal data objects belong to large and dense clusters, whereas outliers belong to small or sparse clusters, or do not belong to any clusters. 12.3 Statistical Approaches 553 Example 12.7 Detecting outliers using clustering. In Figure 12.1, there are two clusters. Cluster C1 contains all the points in the data set except for those in region R. Cluster C2 is tiny, containing just two points in R. Cluster C1 is large in comparison to C2. Therefore, a clustering-based method asserts that the two objects in R are outliers. There are many clustering methods, as discussed in Chapters 10 and 11. There- fore, there are many clustering-based outlier detection methods as well. Clustering is an expensive data mining operation. A straightforward adaptation of a clustering method for outlier detection can be very costly, and thus does not scale up well for large data sets. Clustering-based outlier detection methods are discussed in detail in Section 12.5. 12.3 Statistical Approaches As with statistical methods for clustering, statistical methods for outlier detection make assumptions about data normality. They assume that the normal objects in a data set are generated by a stochastic process (a generative model). Consequently, normal objects occur in regions of high probability for the stochastic model, and objects in the regions of low probability are outliers. The general idea behind statistical methods for outlier detection is to learn a gener- ative model ﬁtting the given data set, and then identify those objects in low-probability regions of the model as outliers. However, there are many different ways to learn genera- tive models. In general, statistical methods for outlier detection can be divided into two major categories: parametric methods and nonparametric methods, according to how the models are speciﬁed and learned. A parametric method assumes that the normal data objects are generated by a para- metric distribution with parameter 2. The probability density function of the parametric distribution f (x,2) gives the probability that object x is generated by the distribution. The smaller this value, the more likely x is an outlier. A nonparametric method does not assume an a priori statistical model. Instead, a nonparametric method tries to determine the model from the input data. Note that most nonparametric methods do not assume that the model is completely parameter- free. (Such an assumption would make learning the model from data almost mission impossible.) Instead, nonparametric methods often take the position that the num- ber and nature of the parameters are ﬂexible and not ﬁxed in advance. Examples of nonparametric methods include histogram and kernel density estimation. 12.3.1 Parametric Methods In this subsection, we introduce several simple yet practical parametric methods for outlier detection. We ﬁrst discuss methods for univariate data based on normal dis- tribution. We then discuss how to handle multivariate data using multiple parametric distributions. 554 Chapter 12 Outlier Detection Detection of Univariate Outliers Based on Normal Distribution Data involving only one attribute or variable are called univariate data. For simplicity, we often choose to assume that data are generated from a normal distribution. We can then learn the parameters of the normal distribution from the input data, and identify the points with low probability as outliers. Let’s start with univariate data. We will try to detect outliers by assuming the data follow a normal distribution. Example 12.8 Univariate outlier detection using maximum likelihood. Suppose a city’s average tem- perature values in July in the last 10 years are, in value-ascending order, 24.0◦C, 28.9◦C, 28.9◦C, 29.0◦C, 29.1◦C, 29.1◦C, 29.2◦C, 29.2◦C, 29.3◦C, and 29.4◦C. Let’s assume that the average temperature follows a normal distribution, which is determined by two parameters: the mean, µ, and the standard deviation, σ. We can use the maximum likelihood method to estimate the parameters µ and σ. That is, we maximize the log-likelihood function lnL(µ,σ 2) = n X i=1 lnf (xi|(µ,σ 2)) = −n 2 ln(2π) −n 2 lnσ 2 − 1 2σ 2 n X i=1 (xi −µ)2, (12.1) where n is the total number of samples, which is 10 in this example. Taking derivatives with respect to µ and σ 2 and solving the resulting system of ﬁrst- order conditions leads to the following maximum likelihood estimates: ˆµ = x = 1 n n X i=1 xi (12.2) ˆσ 2 = 1 n n X i=1 (xi −x)2. (12.3) In this example, we have ˆµ = 24.0 + 28.9 + 28.9 + 29.0 + 29.1 + 29.1 + 29.2 +