tors x and y. A cosine value of 0 means that the two vectors are at 90 degrees to each other (orthogonal) and have no match. The closer the cosine value to 1, the smaller the angle and the greater the match between vectors. Note that because the cosine similarity measure does not obey all of the properties of Section 2.4.4 deﬁning metric measures, it is referred to as a nonmetric measure. Example 2.23 Cosine similarity between two term-frequency vectors. Suppose that x and y are the ﬁrst two term-frequency vectors in Table 2.5. That is, x = (5,0,3,0,2,0,0,2,0,0) and y = (3,0,2,0,1,1,0,1,0,1). How similar are x and y? Using Eq. (2.23) to compute the cosine similarity between the two vectors, we get: xt · y = 5 × 3 + 0 × 0 + 3 × 2 + 0 × 0 + 2 × 1 + 0 × 1 + 0 × 0 + 2 × 1 + 0 × 0 + 0 × 1 = 25 ||x|| = p 52 + 02 + 32 + 02 + 22 + 02 + 02 + 22 + 02 + 02 = 6.48 ||y|| = p 32 + 02 + 22 + 02 + 12 + 12 + 02 + 12 + 02 + 12 = 4.12 sim(x, y) = 0.94 Therefore, if we were using the cosine similarity measure to compare these documents, they would be considered quite similar. When attributes are binary-valued, the cosine similarity function can be interpreted in terms of shared features or attributes. Suppose an object x possesses the ith attribute if xi = 1. Then xt · y is the number of attributes possessed (i.e., shared) by both x and y, and |x||y| is the geometric mean of the number of attributes possessed by x and the number possessed by y. Thus, sim(x, y) is a measure of relative possession of common attributes. A simple variation of cosine similarity for the preceding scenario is sim(x, y) = x · y x · x + y · y −x · y, (2.24) which is the ratio of the number of attributes shared by x and y to the number of attributes possessed by x or y. This function, known as the Tanimoto coefﬁcient or Tanimoto distance, is frequently used in information retrieval and biology taxonomy. 2.6 Exercises 79 2.5 Summary Data sets are made up of data objects. A data object represents an entity. Data objects are described by attributes. Attributes can be nominal, binary, ordinal, or numeric. The values of a nominal (or categorical) attribute are symbols or names of things, where each value represents some kind of category, code, or state. Binary attributes are nominal attributes with only two possible states (such as 1 and 0 or true and false). If the two states are equally important, the attribute is symmetric; otherwise it is asymmetric. An ordinal attribute is an attribute with possible values that have a meaningful order or ranking among them, but the magnitude between successive values is not known. A numeric attribute is quantitative (i.e., it is a measurable quantity) represented in integer or real values. Numeric attribute types can be interval-scaled or ratio- scaled. The values of an interval-scaled attribute are measured in ﬁxed and equal units. Ratio-scaled attributes are numeric attributes with an inherent zero-point. Measurements are ratio-scaled in that we can speak of values as being an order of magnitude larger than the unit of measurement. Basic statistical descriptions provide the analytical foundation for data preprocess- ing. The basic statistical measures for data summarization include mean, weighted mean, median, and mode for measuring the central tendency of data; and range, quan- tiles, quartiles, interquartile range, variance, and standard deviation for measuring the dispersion of data. Graphical representations (e.g., boxplots, quantile plots, quantile– quantile plots, histograms, and scatter plots) facilitate visual inspection of the data and are thus useful for data preprocessing and mining. Data visualization techniques may be pixel-oriented, geometric-based, icon-based, or hierarchical. These methods apply to multidimensional relational data. Additional techniques have been proposed for the visualization of complex data, such as text and social networks. Measures of object similarity and dissimilarity are used in data mining applications such as clustering, outlier analysis, and nearest-neighbor classiﬁcation. Such mea- sures of proximity can be computed for each attribute type studied in this chapter, or for combinations of such attributes. Examples include the Jaccard coefﬁcient for asymmetric binary attributes and Euclidean, Manhattan, Minkowski, and supremum distances for numeric attributes. For applications involving sparse numeric data vec- tors, such as term-frequency vectors, the cosine measure and the Tanimoto coefﬁcient are often used in the assessment of similarity. 2.6 Exercises 2.1 Give three additional commonly used statistical measures that are not already illus- trated in this chapter for the characterization of data dispersion. Discuss how they can be computed efﬁciently in large databases. 80 Chapter 2 Getting to Know Your Data 2.2 Suppose that the data for analysis includes the attribute age. The age values for the data tuples are (in increasing order) 13, 15, 16, 16, 19, 20, 20, 21, 22, 22, 25, 25, 25, 25, 30, 33, 33, 35, 35, 35, 35, 36, 40, 45, 46, 52, 70. (a) What is the mean of the data? What is the median? (b) What is the mode of the data? Comment on the data’s modality (i.e., bimodal, trimodal, etc.). (c) What is the midrange of the data? (d) Can you ﬁnd (roughly) the ﬁrst quartile (Q1) and the third quartile (Q3) of the data? (e) Give the ﬁve-number summary of the data. (f) Show a boxplot of the data. (g) How is a quantile–quantile plot different from a quantile plot? 2.3 Suppose that the values for a given set of data are grouped into intervals. The intervals and corresponding frequencies are as follows: age frequency 1–5 200 6–15 450 16–20 300 21–50 1500 51–80 700 81–110 44 Compute an approximate median value for the data. 2.4 Suppose that a hospital tested the age and body fat data for 18 randomly selected adults with the following results: age 23 23 27 27 39 41 47 49 50 %fat 9.5 26.5 7.8 17.8 31.4 25.9 27.4 27.2 31.2 age 52 54 54 56 57 58 58 60 61 %fat 34.6 42.5 28.8 33.4 30.2 34.1 32.9 41.2 35.7 (a) Calculate the mean, median, and standard deviation of age and %fat. (b) Draw the boxplots for age and %fat. (c) Draw a scatter plot and a q-q plot based on these two variables. 2.5 Brieﬂy outline how to compute the dissimilarity between objects described by the following: (a) Nominal attributes (b) Asymmetric binary attributes 2.7 Bibliographic Notes 81 (c) Numeric attributes (d) Term-frequency vectors 2.6 Given two objects represented by the tuples (22, 1, 42, 10) and (20, 0, 36, 8): (a) Compute the Euclidean distance between the two objects. (b) Compute the Manhattan distance between the two objects. (c) Compute the Minkowski distance between the two objects, using q = 3. (d) Compute the supremum distance between the two objects. 2.7 The median is one of the most important holistic measures in data analysis. Pro- pose several methods for median approximation. Analyze their respective complexity under different parameter settings and decide to what extent the real value can be approximated. Moreover, suggest a heuristic strategy to balance between accuracy and complexity and then apply it to all methods you have given. 2.8 It is important to deﬁne or select similarity measures in data analysis. However, there is no commonly accepted subjective similarity measure. Results can vary depending on the similarity measures used. Nonetheless, seemingly different similarity measures may be equivalent after some transformation. Suppose we have the following 2-D data set: A1 A2 x1 1.5 1.7 x2 2 1.9 x3 1.6 1.8 x4 1.2 1.5 x5 1.5 1.0 (a) Consider the data as 2-D data points. Given a new data point, x = (1.4,1.6) as a query, rank the database points based on similarity with the query using Euclidean distance, Manhattan distance, supremum distance, and cosine similarity. (b) Normalize the data set to make the norm of each data point equal to 1. Use Euclidean distance on the transformed data to rank the data points. 2.7 Bibliographic Notes Methods for descriptive data summarization have been studied in the statistics literature long before the onset of computers. Good summaries of statistical descriptive data min- ing methods include Freedman, Pisani, and Purves [FPP07] and Devore [Dev95]. For 82 Chapter 2 Getting to Know Your Data statistics-based visualization of data using boxplots, quantile plots, quantile–quantile plots, scatter plots, and loess curves, see Cleveland [Cle93]. Pioneering work on data visualization techniques is described in The Visual Dis- play of Quantitative Information [Tuf83], Envisioning Information [Tuf90], and Visual Explanations: Images and Quantities, Evidence and Narrative [Tuf97], all by Tufte, in addition to Graphics and Graphic Information Processing by Bertin [Ber81], Visualizing Data by Cleveland [Cle93], and Information Visualization in Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery edited by Fayyad, Grinstein, and Wierse [FGW01]. Major conferences and symposiums on visualization include ACM Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI), Visualization, and the International Symposium on Infor- mation Visualization. Research on visualization is also published in Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, and IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications. Many graphical user interfaces and visualization tools have been developed and can be found in various data mining products. Several books on data mining (e.g., Data Mining Solutions by Westphal and Blaxton [WB98]) present many good examples and visual snapshots. For a survey of visualization techniques, see “Visual techniques for exploring databases” by Keim [Kei97]. Similarity and distance measures among various variables have been introduced in many textbooks that study cluster analysis, including Hartigan [Har75]; Jain and Dubes [JD88]; Kaufman and Rousseeuw [KR90]; and Arabie, Hubert, and de Soete [AHS96]. Methods for combining attributes of different types into a single dissimilarity matrix were introduced by Kaufman and Rousseeuw [KR90]. 3 Data Preprocessing Today’s real-world databases are highly susceptible to noisy, missing, and inconsistent data due to their typically huge size (often several gigabytes or more) and their likely origin from multiple, heterogenous sources. Low-quality data will lead to low-quality mining results. “How can the data be preprocessed in order to help improve the quality of the data and, consequently, of the mining results? How can the data be preprocessed so as to improve the efﬁciency and ease of the mining process?” There are several data preprocessing techniques. Data cleaning can be applied to remove noise and correct inconsistencies in data. Data integration merges data from multiple sources into a coherent data store such as a data warehouse. Data reduction can reduce data size by, for instance, aggregating, eliminating redundant features, or clustering. Data transformations (e.g., normalization) may be applied, where data are scaled to fall within a smaller range like 0.0 to 1.0. This can improve the accuracy and efﬁciency of mining algorithms involving distance measurements. These techniques are not mutually exclusive; they may work together. For example, data cleaning can involve transformations to correct wrong data, such as by transforming all entries for a date ﬁeld to a common format. In Chapter 2, we learned about the different attribute types and how to use basic statistical descriptions to study data characteristics. These can help identify erroneous values and outliers, which will be useful in the data cleaning and integration steps. Data processing techniques, when applied before mining, can substantially improve the overall quality of the patterns mined and/or the time required for the actual mining. In this chapter, we introduce the basic concepts of data preprocessing in Section 3.1. The methods for data preprocessing are organized into the following categories: data cleaning (Section 3.2), data integration (Section 3.3), data reduction (Section 3.4), and data transformation (Section 3.5). c⃝2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques 83 84 Chapter 3 Data Preprocessing 3.1 Data Preprocessing: An Overview This section presents an overview of data preprocessing. Section 3.1.1 illustrates the many elements deﬁning data quality. This provides the incentive behind data prepro- cessing. Section 3.1.2 outlines the major tasks in data preprocessing. 3.1.1 Data Quality: Why Preprocess the Data? Data have quality if they satisfy the requirements of the intended use. There are many factors comprising data quality, including accuracy, completeness, consistency, timeliness, believability, and interpretability. Imagine that you are a manager at AllElectronics and have been charged with ana- lyzing the company’s data with respect to your branch’s sales. You immediately set out to perform this task. You carefully inspect the company’s database and data warehouse, identifying and selecting the attributes or dimensions (e.g., item, price, and units sold) to be included in your analysis. Alas! You notice that several of the attributes for various tuples have no recorded value. For your analysis, you would like to include informa- tion as to whether each item purchased was advertised as on sale, yet you discover that this information has not been recorded. Furthermore, users of your database system have reported errors, unusual values, and inconsistencies in the data recorded for some transactions. In other words, the data you wish to analyze by data mining techniques are incomplete (lacking attribute values or certain attributes of interest, or containing only aggregate data); inaccurate or noisy (containing errors, or values that deviate from the expected); and inconsistent (e.g., containing discrepancies in the department codes used to categorize items). Welcome to the real world! This scenario illustrates three of the elements deﬁning data quality: accuracy, com- pleteness, and consistency. Inaccurate, incomplete, and inconsistent data are common- place properties of large real-world databases and data warehouses. There are many possible reasons for inaccurate data (i.e., having incorrect attribute values). The data col- lection instruments used may be faulty. There may have been human or computer errors occurring at data entry. Users may purposely submit incorrect data values for manda- tory ﬁelds when they do not wish to submit personal information (e.g., by choosing the default value “January 1” displayed for birthday). This is known as disguised missing data. Errors in data transmission can also occur. There may be technology limitations such as limited buffer size for coordinating synchronized data transfer and consump- tion. Incorrect data may also result from inconsistencies in naming conventions or data codes, or inconsistent formats for input ﬁelds (e.g., date). Duplicate tuples also require data cleaning. Incomplete data can occur for a number of reasons. Attributes of interest may not always be available, such as customer information for sales transaction data. Other data may not be included simply because they were not considered important at the time of entry. Relevant data may not be recorded due to a misunderstanding or because of equipment malfunctions. Data that were inconsistent with other recorded data may 3.1 Data Preprocessing: An Overview 85 have been deleted. Furthermore, the recording of the data history or modiﬁcations may have been overlooked. Missing data, particularly for tuples with missing values for some attributes, may need to be inferred. Recall that data quality depends on the intended use of the data. Two different users may have very different assessments of the quality of a given database. For example, a marketing analyst may need to access the database mentioned before for a list of cus- tomer addresses. Some of the addresses are outdated or incorrect, yet overall, 80% of the addresses are accurate. The marketing analyst considers this to be a large customer database for target marketing purposes and is pleased with the database’s accuracy, although, as sales manager, you found the data inaccurate. Timeliness also affects data quality. Suppose that you are overseeing the distribu- tion of monthly sales bonuses to the top sales representatives at AllElectronics. Several sales representatives, however, fail to submit their sales records on time at the end of the month. There are also a number of corrections and adjustments that ﬂow in after the month’s end. For a period of time following each month, the data stored in the database are incomplete. However, once all of the data are received, it is correct. The fact that the month-end data are not updated in a timely fashion has a negative impact on the data quality. Two other factors affecting data quality are believability and interpretability. Believ- ability reﬂects how much the data are trusted by users, while interpretability reﬂects how easy the data are understood. Suppose that a database, at one point, had several errors, all of which have since been corrected. The past errors, however, had caused many problems for sales department users, and so they no longer trust the data. The data also use many accounting codes, which the sales department does not know how to interpret. Even though the database is now accurate, complete, consistent, and timely, sales department users may regard it as of low quality due to poor believability and interpretability. 3.1.2 Major Tasks in Data Preprocessing In this section, we look at the major steps involved in data preprocessing, namely, data cleaning, data integration, data reduction, and data transformation. Data cleaning routines work to “clean” the data by ﬁlling in missing values, smooth- ing noisy data, identifying or removing outliers, and resolving inconsistencies. If users believe the data are dirty, they are unlikely to trust the results of any data mining that has been applied. Furthermore, dirty data can cause confusion for the mining procedure, resulting in unreliable output. Although most mining routines have some procedures for dealing with incomplete or noisy data, they are not always robust. Instead, they may concentrate on avoiding overﬁtting the data to the function being modeled. Therefore, a useful preprocessing step is to run your data through some data cleaning routines. Section 3.2 discusses methods for data cleaning. Getting back to your task at AllElectronics, suppose that you would like to include data from multiple sources in your analysis. This would involve integrating multiple databases, data cubes, or ﬁles (i.e., data integration). Yet some attributes representing a 86 Chapter 3 Data Preprocessing given concept may have different names in different databases, causing inconsistencies and redundancies. For example, the attribute for customer identiﬁcation may be referred to as customer id in one data store and cust id in another. Naming inconsistencies may also occur for attribute values. For example, the same ﬁrst name could be registered as “Bill” in one database, “William” in another, and “B.” in a third. Furthermore, you sus- pect that some attributes may be inferred from others (e.g., annual revenue). Having a large amount of redundant data may slow down or confuse the knowledge discov- ery process. Clearly, in addition to data cleaning, steps must be taken to help avoid redundancies during data integration. Typically, data cleaning and data integration are performed as a preprocessing step when preparing data for a data warehouse. Addi- tional data cleaning can be performed to detect and remove redundancies that may have resulted from data integration. “Hmmm,” you wonder, as you consider your data even further. “The data set I have selected for analysis is HUGE, which is sure to slow down the mining process. Is there a way I can reduce the size of my data set without jeopardizing the data mining results?” Data reduction obtains a reduced representation of the data set that is much smaller in volume, yet produces the same (or almost the same) analytical results. Data reduction strategies include dimensionality reduction and numerosity reduction. In dimensionality reduction, data encoding schemes are applied so as to obtain a reduced or “compressed” representation of the original data. Examples include data compression techniques (e.g., wavelet transforms and principal components analysis), attribute subset selection (e.g., removing irrelevant attributes), and attribute construction (e.g., where a small set of more useful attributes is derived from the original set). In numerosity reduction, the data are replaced by alternative, smaller representa- tions using parametric models (e.g., regression or log-linear models) or nonparametric models (e.g., histograms, clusters, sampling, or data aggregation). Data reduction is the topic of Section 3.4. Getting back to your data, you have decided, say, that you would like to use a distance- based mining algorithm for your analysis, such as neural networks, nearest-neighbor classiﬁers, or clustering.1 Such methods provide better results if the data to be ana- lyzed have been normalized, that is, scaled to a smaller range such as [0.0, 1.0]. Your customer data, for example, contain the attributes age and annual salary. The annual salary attribute usually takes much larger values than age. Therefore, if the attributes are left unnormalized, the distance measurements taken on annual salary will generally outweigh distance measurements taken on age. Discretization and concept hierarchy gen- eration can also be useful, where raw data values for attributes are replaced by ranges or higher conceptual levels. For example, raw values for age may be replaced by higher-level concepts, such as youth, adult, or senior. Discretization and concept hierarchy generation are powerful tools for data min- ing in that they allow data mining at multiple abstraction levels. Normalization, data 1Neural networks and nearest-neighbor classiﬁers are described in Chapter 9, and clustering is discussed in Chapters 10 and 11. 3.2 Data Preprocessing: An Overview 87 discretization, and concept hierarchy generation are forms of data transformation. You soon realize such data transformation operations are additional data preprocessing procedures that would contribute toward the success of the mining process. Data integration and data discretization are discussed in Sections 3.5. Figure 3.1 summarizes the data preprocessing steps described here. Note that the pre- vious categorization is not mutually exclusive. For example, the removal of redundant data may be seen as a form of data cleaning, as well as data reduction. In summary, real-world data tend to be dirty, incomplete, and inconsistent. Data pre- processing techniques can improve data quality, thereby helping to improve the accuracy and efﬁciency of the subsequent mining process. Data preprocessing is an important step in the knowledge discovery process, because quality decisions must be based on qual- ity data. Detecting data anomalies, rectifying them early, and reducing the data to be analyzed can lead to huge payoffs for decision making. Data cleaning Data integration Data reduction Attributes Attributes A1 A2 A3 ... A126 T1 T2 T3 T4 ... T2000 Transactions Transactions T1 T4 ... T1456 A1 A3 ... A115 Data transformation 2, 32, 100, 59, 48 0.02, 0.32, 1.00, 0.59, 0.48 Figure 3.1 Forms of data preprocessing. 88 Chapter 3 Data Preprocessing 3.2 Data Cleaning Real-world data tend to be incomplete, noisy, and inconsistent. Data cleaning (or data cleansing) routines attempt to ﬁll in missing values, smooth out noise while identi- fying outliers, and correct inconsistencies in the data. In this section, you will study basic methods for data cleaning. Section 3.2.1 looks at ways of handling missing values. Section 3.2.2 explains data smoothing techniques. Section 3.2.3 discusses approaches to data cleaning as a process. 3.2.1 Missing Values Imagine that you need to analyze AllElectronics sales and customer data. You note that many tuples have no recorded value for several attributes such as customer income. How can you go about ﬁlling in the missing values for this attribute? Let’s look at the following methods. 1. Ignore the tuple: This is usually done when the class label is missing (assuming the mining task involves classiﬁcation). This method is not very effective, unless the tuple contains several attributes with missing values. It is especially poor when the percent- age of missing values per attribute varies considerably. By ignoring the tuple, we do not make use of the remaining attributes’ values in the tuple. Such data could have been useful to the task at hand. 2. Fill in the missing value manually: In general, this approach is time consuming and may not be feasible given a large data set with many missing values. 3. Use a global constant to ﬁll in the missing value: Replace all missing attribute values by the same constant such as a label like “Unknown” or −∞. If missing values are replaced by, say, “Unknown,” then the mining program may mistakenly think that they form an interesting concept, since they all have a value in common—that of “Unknown.” Hence, although this method is simple, it is not foolproof. 4. Use a measure of central tendency for the attribute (e.g., the mean or median) to ﬁll in the missing value: Chapter 2 discussed measures of central tendency, which indicate the “middle” value of a data distribution. For normal (symmetric) data dis- tributions, the mean can be used, while skewed data distribution should employ the median (Section 2.2). For example, suppose that the data distribution regard- ing the income of AllElectronics customers is symmetric and that the mean income is $56,000. Use this value to replace the missing value for income. 5. Use the attribute mean or median for all samples belonging to the same class as the given tuple: For example, if classifying customers according to credit risk, we may replace the missing value with the mean income value for customers in the same credit risk category as that of the given tuple. If the data distribution for a given class is skewed, the median value is a better choice. 6. Use the most probable value to ﬁll in the missing value: This may be determined with regression, inference-based tools using a Bayesian formalism, or decision tree 3.2 Data Cleaning 89 induction. For example, using the other customer attributes in your data set, you may construct a decision tree to predict the missing values for income. Decision trees and Bayesian inference are described in detail in Chapters 8 and 9, respectively, while regression is introduced in Section 3.4.5. Methods 3 through 6 bias the data—the ﬁlled-in value may not be correct. Method 6, however, is a popular strategy. In comparison to the other methods, it uses the most information from the present data to predict missing values. By considering the other attributes’ values in its estimation of the missing value for income, there is a greater chance that the relationships between income and the other attributes are preserved. It is important to note that, in some cases, a missing value may not imply an error in the data! For example, when applying for a credit card, candidates may be asked to supply their driver’s license number. Candidates who do not have a driver’s license may naturally leave this ﬁeld blank. Forms should allow respondents to specify values such as “not applicable.” Software routines may also be used to uncover other null values (e.g., “don’t know,” “?” or “none”). Ideally, each attribute should have one or more rules regarding the null condition. The rules may specify whether or not nulls are allowed and/or how such values should be handled or transformed. Fields may also be inten- tionally left blank if they are to be provided in a later step of the business process. Hence, although we can try our best to clean the data after it is seized, good database and data entry procedure design should help minimize the number of missing values or errors in the ﬁrst place. 3.2.2 Noisy Data “What is noise?” Noise is a random error or variance in a measured variable. In Chapter 2, we saw how some basic statistical description techniques (e.g., boxplots and scatter plots), and methods of data visualization can be used to identify outliers, which may represent noise. Given a numeric attribute such as, say, price, how can we “smooth” out the data to remove the noise? Let’s look at the following data smoothing techniques. Binning: Binning methods smooth a sorted data value by consulting its “neighbor- hood,” that is, the values around it. The sorted values are distributed into a number of “buckets,” or bins. Because binning methods consult the neighborhood of values, they perform local smoothing. Figure 3.2 illustrates some binning techniques. In this example, the data for price are ﬁrst sorted and then partitioned into equal-frequency bins of size 3 (i.e., each bin contains three values). In smoothing by bin means, each value in a bin is replaced by the mean value of the bin. For example, the mean of the values 4, 8, and 15 in Bin 1 is 9. Therefore, each original value in this bin is replaced by the value 9. Similarly, smoothing by bin medians can be employed, in which each bin value is replaced by the bin median. In smoothing by bin boundaries, the minimum and maximum values in a given bin are identiﬁed as the bin boundaries. Each bin value is then replaced by the closest boundary value. In general, the larger the width, the 90 Chapter 3 Data Preprocessing Sorted data for price (in dollars): 4, 8, 15, 21, 21, 24, 25, 28, 34 Partition into (equal-frequency) bins: Bin 1: 4, 8, 15 Bin 2: 21, 21, 24 Bin 3: 25, 28, 34 Smoothing by bin means: Bin 1: 9, 9, 9 Bin 2: 22, 22, 22 Bin 3: 29, 29, 29 Smoothing by bin boundaries: Bin 1: 4, 4, 15 Bin 2: 21, 21, 24 Bin 3: 25, 25, 34 Figure 3.2 Binning methods for data smoothing. greater the effect of the smoothing. Alternatively, bins may be equal width, where the interval range of values in each bin is constant. Binning is also used as a discretization technique and is further discussed in Section 3.5. Regression: Data smoothing can also be done by regression, a technique that con- forms data values to a function. Linear regression involves ﬁnding the “best” line to ﬁt two attributes (or variables) so that one attribute can be used to predict the other. Multiple linear regression is an extension of linear regression, where more than two attributes are involved and the data are ﬁt to a multidimensional surface. Regression is further described in Section 3.4.5. Outlier analysis: Outliers may be detected by clustering, for example, where similar values are organized into groups, or “clusters.” Intuitively, values that fall outside of the set of clusters may be considered outliers (Figure 3.3). Chapter 12 is dedicated to the topic of outlier analysis. Many data smoothing methods are also used for data discretization (a form of data transformation) and data reduction. For example, the binning techniques described before reduce the number of distinct values per attribute. This acts as a form of data reduction for logic-based data mining methods, such as decision tree induction, which repeatedly makes value comparisons on sorted data. Concept hierarchies are a form of data discretization that can also be used for data smoothing. A concept hierarchy for price, for example, may map real price values into inexpensive, moderately priced, and expensive, thereby reducing the number of data values to be handled by the mining 3.2 Data Cleaning 91 Figure 3.3 A 2-D customer data plot with respect to customer locations in a city, showing three data clusters. Outliers may be detected as values that fall outside of the cluster sets. process. Data discretization is discussed in Section 3.5. Some methods of classiﬁcation (e.g., neural networks) have built-in data smoothing mechanisms. Classiﬁcation is the topic of Chapters 8 and 9. 3.2.3 Data Cleaning as a Process Missing values, noise, and inconsistencies contribute to inaccurate data. So far, we have looked at techniques for handling missing data and for smoothing data. “But data clean- ing is a big job. What about data cleaning as a process? How exactly does one proceed in tackling this task? Are there any tools out there to help?” The ﬁrst step in data cleaning as a process is discrepancy detection. Discrepancies can be caused by several factors, including poorly designed data entry forms that have many optional ﬁelds, human error in data entry, deliberate errors (e.g., respondents not want- ing to divulge information about themselves), and data decay (e.g., outdated addresses). Discrepancies may also arise from inconsistent data representations and inconsistent use of codes. Other sources of discrepancies include errors in instrumentation devices that record data and system errors. Errors can also occur when the data are (inadequately) used for purposes other than originally intended. There may also be inconsistencies due to data integration (e.g., where a given attribute can have different names in different databases).2 2Data integration and the removal of redundant data that can result from such integration are further described in Section 3.3. 92 Chapter 3 Data Preprocessing “So, how can we proceed with discrepancy detection?” As a starting point, use any knowledge you may already have regarding properties of the data. Such knowledge or “data about data” is referred to as metadata. This is where we can make use of the know- ledge we gained about our data in Chapter 2. For example, what are the data type and domain of each attribute? What are the acceptable values for each attribute? The basic statistical data descriptions discussed in Section 2.2 are useful here to grasp data trends and identify anomalies. For example, ﬁnd the mean, median, and mode values. Are the data symmetric or skewed? What is the range of values? Do all values fall within the expected range? What is the standard deviation of each attribute? Values that are more than two standard deviations away from the mean for a given attribute may be ﬂagged as potential outliers. Are there any known dependencies between attributes? In this step, you may write your own scripts and/or use some of the tools that we discuss further later. From this, you may ﬁnd noise, outliers, and unusual values that need investigation. As a data analyst, you should be on the lookout for the inconsistent use of codes and any inconsistent data representations (e.g., “2010/12/25” and “25/12/2010” for date). Field overloading is another error source that typically results when developers squeeze new attribute deﬁnitions into unused (bit) portions of already deﬁned attributes (e.g., an unused bit of an attribute that has a value range that uses only, say, 31 out of 32 bits). The data should also be examined regarding unique rules, consecutive rules, and null rules. A unique rule says that each value of the given attribute must be different from all other values for that attribute. A consecutive rule says that there can be no miss- ing values between the lowest and highest values for the attribute, and that all values must also be unique (e.g., as in check numbers). A null rule speciﬁes the use of blanks, question marks, special characters, or other strings that may indicate the null condition (e.g., where a value for a given attribute is not available), and how such values should be handled. As mentioned in Section 3.2.1, reasons for missing values may include (1) the person originally asked to provide a value for the attribute refuses and/or ﬁnds that the information requested is not applicable (e.g., a license number attribute left blank by nondrivers); (2) the data entry person does not know the correct value; or (3) the value is to be provided by a later step of the process. The null rule should specify how to record the null condition, for example, such as to store zero for numeric attributes, a blank for character attributes, or any other conventions that may be in use (e.g., entries like “don’t know” or “?” should be transformed to blank). There are a number of different commercial tools that can aid in the discrepancy detection step. Data scrubbing tools use simple domain knowledge (e.g., knowledge of postal addresses and spell-checking) to detect errors and make corrections in the data. These tools rely on parsing and fuzzy matching techniques when cleaning data from multiple sources. Data auditing tools ﬁnd discrepancies by analyzing the data to discover rules and relationships, and detecting data that violate such conditions. They are variants of data mining tools. For example, they may employ statistical analysis to ﬁnd correlations, or clustering to identify outliers. They may also use the basic statistical data descriptions presented in Section 2.2. Some data inconsistencies may be corrected manually using external references. For example, errors made at data entry may be corrected by performing a paper 3.3 Data Integration 93 trace. Most errors, however, will require data transformations. That is, once we ﬁnd discrepancies, we typically need to deﬁne and apply (a series of) transformations to correct them. Commercial tools can assist in the data transformation step. Data migration tools allow simple transformations to be speciﬁed such as to replace the string “gender” by “sex.” ETL (extraction/transformation/loading) tools allow users to specify transforms through a graphical user interface (GUI). These tools typically support only a restricted set of transforms so that, often, we may also choose to write custom scripts for this step of the data cleaning process. The two-step process of discrepancy detection and data transformation (to correct discrepancies) iterates. This process, however, is error-prone and time consuming. Some transformations may introduce more discrepancies. Some nested discrepancies may only be detected after others have been ﬁxed. For example, a typo such as “20010” in a year ﬁeld may only surface once all date values have been converted to a uniform format. Transformations are often done as a batch process while the user waits without feedback. Only after the transformation is complete can the user go back and check that no new anomalies have been mistakenly created. Typically, numerous iterations are required before the user is satisﬁed. Any tuples that cannot be automatically handled by a given transformation are typically written to a ﬁle without any explanation regarding the rea- soning behind their failure. As a result, the entire data cleaning process also suffers from a lack of interactivity. New approaches to data cleaning emphasize increased interactivity. Potter’s Wheel, for example, is a publicly available data cleaning tool that integrates discrepancy detec- tion and transformation. Users gradually build a series of transformations by composing and debugging individual transformations, one step at a time, on a spreadsheet-like interface. The transformations can be speciﬁed graphically or by providing examples. Results are shown immediately on the records that are visible on the screen. The user can choose to undo the transformations, so that transformations that introduced addi- tional errors can be “erased.” The tool automatically performs discrepancy checking in the background on the latest transformed view of the data. Users can gradually develop and reﬁne transformations as discrepancies are found, leading to more effective and efﬁcient data cleaning. Another approach to increased interactivity in data cleaning is the development of declarative languages for the speciﬁcation of data transformation operators. Such work focuses on deﬁning powerful extensions to SQL and algorithms that enable users to express data cleaning speciﬁcations efﬁciently. As we discover more about the data, it is important to keep updating the metadata to reﬂect this knowledge. This will help speed up data cleaning on future versions of the same data store. 3.3 Data Integration Data mining often requires data integration—the merging of data from multiple data stores. Careful integration can help reduce and avoid redundancies and inconsistencies 94 Chapter 3 Data Preprocessing in the resulting data set. This can help improve the accuracy and speed of the subsequent data mining process. The semantic heterogeneity and structure of data pose great challenges in data inte- gration. How can we match schema and objects from different sources? This is the essence of the entity identiﬁcation problem, described in Section 3.3.1. Are any attributes correlated? Section 3.3.2 presents correlation tests for numeric and nominal data. Tuple duplication is described in Section 3.3.3. Finally, Section 3.3.4 touches on the detection and resolution of data value conﬂicts. 3.3.1 Entity Identiﬁcation Problem It is likely that your data analysis task will involve data integration, which combines data from multiple sources into a coherent data store, as in data warehousing. These sources may include multiple databases, data cubes, or ﬂat ﬁles. There are a number of issues to consider during data integration. Schema integration and object matching can be tricky. How can equivalent real-world entities from multiple data sources be matched up? This is referred to as the entity identiﬁcation problem. For example, how can the data analyst or the computer be sure that customer id in one database and cust number in another refer to the same attribute? Examples of metadata for each attribute include the name, meaning, data type, and range of values permitted for the attribute, and null rules for handling blank, zero, or null values (Section 3.2). Such metadata can be used to help avoid errors in schema integration. The metadata may also be used to help transform the data (e.g., where data codes for pay type in one database may be “H” and “S” but 1 and 2 in another). Hence, this step also relates to data cleaning, as described earlier. When matching attributes from one database to another during integration, special attention must be paid to the structure of the data. This is to ensure that any attribute functional dependencies and referential constraints in the source system match those in the target system. For example, in one system, a discount may be applied to the order, whereas in another system it is applied to each individual line item within the order. If this is not caught before integration, items in the target system may be improperly discounted. 3.3.2 Redundancy and Correlation Analysis Redundancy is another important issue in data integration. An attribute (such as annual revenue, for instance) may be redundant if it can be “derived” from another attribute or set of attributes. Inconsistencies in attribute or dimension naming can also cause redundancies in the resulting data set. Some redundancies can be detected by correlation analysis. Given two attributes, such analysis can measure how strongly one attribute implies the other, based on the available data. For nominal data, we use the χ2 (chi-square) test. For numeric attributes, we can use the correlation coefﬁcient and covariance, both of which access how one attribute’s values vary from those of another. 3.3 Data Integration 95 χ2 Correlation Test for Nominal Data For nominal data, a correlation relationship between two attributes, A and B, can be discovered by a χ2 (chi-square) test. Suppose A has c distinct values, namely a1,a2,...ac. B has r distinct values, namely b1,b2,...br. The data tuples described by A and B can be shown as a contingency table, with the c values of A making up the columns and the r values of B making up the rows. Let (Ai,Bj) denote the joint event that attribute A takes on value ai and attribute B takes on value bj, that is, where (A = ai,B = bj). Each and every possible (Ai,Bj) joint event has its own cell (or slot) in the table. The χ2 value (also known as the Pearson χ2 statistic) is computed as χ2 = c X i=1 r X j=1 (oij −eij)2 eij , (3.1) where oij is the observed frequency (i.e., actual count) of the joint event (Ai,Bj) and eij is the expected frequency of (Ai,Bj), which can be computed as eij = count(A = ai) × count(B = bj) n , (3.2) where n is the number of data tuples, count(A = ai) is the number of tuples having value ai for A, and count(B = bj) is the number of tuples having value bj for B. The sum in Eq. (3.1) is computed over all of the r × c cells. Note that the cells that contribute the most to the χ2 value are those for which the actual count is very different from that expected. The χ2 statistic tests the hypothesis that A and B are independent, that is, there is no correlation between them. The test is based on a signiﬁcance level, with (r −1) × (c −1) degrees of freedom. We illustrate the use of this statistic in Example 3.1. If the hypothesis can be rejected, then we say that A and B are statistically correlated. Example 3.1 Correlation analysis of nominal attributes using χ2. Suppose that a group of 1500 people was surveyed. The gender of each person was noted. Each person was polled as to whether his or her preferred type of reading material was ﬁction or nonﬁction. Thus, we have two attributes, gender and preferred reading. The observed frequency (or count) of each possible joint event is summarized in the contingency table shown in Table 3.1, where the numbers in parentheses are the expected frequencies. The expected frequen- cies are calculated based on the data distribution for both attributes using Eq. (3.2). Using Eq. (3.2), we can verify the expected frequencies for each cell. For example, the expected frequency for the cell (male, ﬁction) is e11 = count(male) × count(ﬁction) n = 300 × 450 1500 = 90, and so on. Notice that in any row, the sum of the expected frequencies must equal the total observed frequency for that row, and the sum of the expected frequencies in any column must also equal the total observed frequency for that column. 96 Chapter 3 Data Preprocessing Table 3.1 Example 2.1’s 2 × 2 Contingency Table Data male female Total ﬁction 250 (90) 200 (360) 450 non ﬁction 50 (210) 1000 (840) 1050 Total 300 1200 1500 Note: Are gender and preferred reading correlated? Using Eq. (3.1) for χ2 computation, we get χ2 = (250 −90)2 90 + (50 −210)2 210 + (200 −360)2 360 + (1000 −840)2 840 = 284.44 + 121.90 + 71.11 + 30.48 = 507.93. For this 2 × 2 table, the degrees of freedom are (2 −1)(2 −1) = 1. For 1 degree of free- dom, the χ2 value needed to reject the hypothesis at the 0.001 signiﬁcance level is 10.828 (taken from the table of upper percentage points of the χ2 distribution, typically avail- able from any textbook on statistics). Since our computed value is above this, we can reject the hypothesis that gender and preferred reading are independent and conclude that the two attributes are (strongly) correlated for the given group of people. Correlation Coefﬁcient for Numeric Data For numeric attributes, we can evaluate the correlation between two attributes, A and B, by computing the correlation coefﬁcient (also known as Pearson’s product moment coefﬁcient, named after its inventer, Karl Pearson). This is rA,B = n X i=1 (ai −¯A)(bi −¯B) nσAσB = n X i=1 (aibi) −n ¯A¯B nσAσB , (3.3) where n is the number of tuples, ai and bi are the respective values of A and B in tuple i, ¯A and ¯B are the respective mean values of A and B, σA and σB are the respective standard deviations of A and B (as deﬁned in Section 2.2.2), and 6(aibi) is the sum of the AB cross-product (i.e., for each tuple, the value for A is multiplied by the value for B in that tuple). Note that −1 ≤rA,B ≤+1. If rA,B is greater than 0, then A and B are positively correlated, meaning that the values of A increase as the values of B increase. The higher the value, the stronger the correlation (i.e., the more each attribute implies the other). Hence, a higher value may indicate that A (or B) may be removed as a redundancy. If the resulting value is equal to 0, then A and B are independent and there is no correlation between them. If the resulting value is less than 0, then A and B are negatively correlated, where the values of one attribute increase as the values of the other attribute decrease. This means that each attribute discourages the other. Scatter plots can also be used to view correlations between attributes (Section 2.2.3). For example, Figure 2.8’s 3.3 Data Integration 97 scatter plots respectively show positively correlated data and negatively correlated data, while Figure 2.9 displays uncorrelated data. Note that correlation does not imply causality. That is, if A and B are correlated, this does not necessarily imply that A causes B or that B causes A. For example, in analyzing a demographic database, we may ﬁnd that attributes representing the number of hospitals and the number of car thefts in a region are correlated. This does not mean that one causes the other. Both are actually causally linked to a third attribute, namely, population. Covariance of Numeric Data In probability theory and statistics, correlation and covariance are two similar measures for assessing how much two attributes change together. Consider two numeric attributes A and B, and a set of n observations {(a1,b1),...,(an,bn)}. The mean values of A and B, respectively, are also known as the expected values on A and B, that is, E(A) = ¯A = Pn i=1 ai n and E(B) = ¯B = Pn i=1 bi n . The covariance between A and B is deﬁned as Cov(A,B) = E((A −¯A)(B −¯B)) = Pn i=1(ai −¯A)(bi −¯B) n . (3.4) If we compare Eq. (3.3) for rA,B (correlation coefﬁcient) with Eq. (3.4) for covariance, we see that rA,B = Cov(A,B) σAσB , (3.5) where σA and σB are the standard deviations of A and B, respectively. It can also be shown that Cov(A,B) = E(A · B) −¯A¯B. (3.6) This equation may simplify calculations. For two attributes A and B that tend to change together, if A is larger than ¯A (the expected value of A), then B is likely to be larger than ¯B (the expected value of B). Therefore, the covariance between A and B is positive. On the other hand, if one of the attributes tends to be above its expected value when the other attribute is below its expected value, then the covariance of A and B is negative. If A and B are independent (i.e., they do not have correlation), then E(A · B) = E(A) · E(B). Therefore, the covariance is Cov(A,B) = E(A · B) −¯A¯B = E(A) · E(B) −¯A¯B = 0. However, the converse is not true. Some pairs of random variables (attributes) may have a covariance of 0 but are not independent. Only under some additional assumptions 98 Chapter 3 Data Preprocessing Table 3.2 Stock Prices for AllElectronics and HighTech Time point AllElectronics HighTech t1 6 20 t2 5 10 t3 4 14 t4 3 5 t5 2 5 (e.g., the data follow multivariate normal distributions) does a covariance of 0 imply independence. Example 3.2 Covariance analysis of numeric attributes. Consider Table 3.2, which presents a sim- pliﬁed example of stock prices observed at ﬁve time points for AllElectronics and HighTech, a high-tech company. If the stocks are affected by the same industry trends, will their prices rise or fall together? E(AllElectronics) = 6 + 5 + 4 + 3 + 2 5 = 20 5 = $4 and E(HighTech) = 20 + 10 + 14 + 5 + 5 5 = 54 5 = $10.80. Thus, using Eq. (3.4), we compute Cov(AllElectroncis,HighTech) = 6 × 20 + 5 × 10 + 4 × 14 + 3 × 5 + 2 × 5 5 −4 × 10.80 = 50.2 −43.2 = 7. Therefore, given the positive covariance we can say that stock prices for both companies rise together. Variance is a special case of covariance, where the two attributes are identical (i.e., the covariance of an attribute with itself). Variance was discussed in Chapter 2. 3.3.3 Tuple Duplication In addition to detecting redundancies between attributes, duplication should also be detected at the tuple level (e.g., where there are two or more identical tuples for a given unique data entry case). The use of denormalized tables (often done to improve per- formance by avoiding joins) is another source of data redundancy. Inconsistencies often arise between various duplicates, due to inaccurate data entry or updating some but not all data occurrences. For example, if a purchase order database contains attributes for 3.4 Data Reduction 99 the purchaser’s name and address instead of a key to this information in a purchaser database, discrepancies can occur, such as the same purchaser’s name appearing with different addresses within the purchase order database. 3.3.4 Data Value Conﬂict Detection and Resolution Data integration also involves the detection and resolution of data value conﬂicts. For example, for the same real-world entity, attribute values from different sources may dif- fer. This may be due to differences in representation, scaling, or encoding. For instance, a weight attribute may be stored in metric units in one system and British imperial units in another. For a hotel chain, the price of rooms in different cities may involve not only different currencies but also different services (e.g., free breakfast) and taxes. When exchanging information between schools, for example, each school may have its own curriculum and grading scheme. One university may adopt a quarter system, offer three courses on database systems, and assign grades from A+ to F, whereas another may adopt a semester system, offer two courses on databases, and assign grades from 1 to 10. It is difﬁcult to work out precise course-to-grade transformation rules between the two universities, making information exchange difﬁcult. Attributes may also differ on the abstraction level, where an attribute in one sys- tem is recorded at, say, a lower abstraction level than the “same” attribute in another. For example, the total sales in one database may refer to one branch of All Electronics, while an attribute of the same name in another database may refer to the total sales for All Electronics stores in a given region. The topic of discrepancy detection is further described in Section 3.2.3 on data cleaning as a process. 3.4 Data Reduction Imagine that you have selected data from the AllElectronics data warehouse for analysis. The data set will likely be huge! Complex data analysis and mining on huge amounts of data can take a long time, making such analysis impractical or infeasible. Data reduction techniques can be applied to obtain a reduced representation of the data set that is much smaller in volume, yet closely maintains the integrity of the original data. That is, mining on the reduced data set should be more efﬁcient yet produce the same (or almost the same) analytical results. In this section, we ﬁrst present an overview of data reduction strategies, followed by a closer look at individual techniques. 3.4.1 Overview of Data Reduction Strategies Data reduction strategies include dimensionality reduction, numerosity reduction, and data compression. Dimensionality reduction is the process of reducing the number of random variables or attributes under consideration. Dimensionality reduction methods include wavelet 100 Chapter 3 Data Preprocessing transforms (Section 3.4.2) and principal components analysis (Section 3.4.3), which transform or project the original data onto a smaller space. Attribute subset selection is a method of dimensionality reduction in which irrelevant, weakly relevant, or redundant attributes or dimensions are detected and removed (Section 3.4.4). Numerosity reduction techniques replace the original data volume by alternative, smaller forms of data representation. These techniques may be parametric or non- parametric. For parametric methods, a model is used to estimate the data, so that typically only the data parameters need to be stored, instead of the actual data. (Out- liers may also be stored.) Regression and log-linear models (Section 3.4.5) are examples. Nonparametric methods for storing reduced representations of the data include his- tograms (Section 3.4.6), clustering (Section 3.4.7), sampling (Section 3.4.8), and data cube aggregation (Section 3.4.9). In data compression, transformations are applied so as to obtain a reduced or “com- pressed” representation of the original data. If the original data can be reconstructed from the compressed data without any information loss, the data reduction is called lossless. If, instead, we can reconstruct only an approximation of the original data, then the data reduction is called lossy. There are several lossless algorithms for string com- pression; however, they typically allow only limited data manipulation. Dimensionality reduction and numerosity reduction techniques can also be considered forms of data compression. There are many other ways of organizing methods of data reduction. The computa- tional time spent on data reduction should not outweigh or “erase” the time saved by mining on a reduced data set size. 3.4.2 Wavelet Transforms The discrete wavelet transform (DWT) is a linear signal processing technique that, when applied to a data vector X, transforms it to a numerically different vector, X′, of wavelet coefﬁcients. The two vectors are of the same length. When applying this tech- nique to data reduction, we consider each tuple as an n-dimensional data vector, that is, X = (x1,x2,...,xn), depicting n measurements made on the tuple from n database attributes.3 “How can this technique be useful for data reduction if the wavelet transformed data are of the same length as the original data?” The usefulness lies in the fact that the wavelet transformed data can be truncated. A compressed approximation of the data can be retained by storing only a small fraction of the strongest of the wavelet coefﬁcients. For example, all wavelet coefﬁcients larger than some user-speciﬁed threshold can be retained. All other coefﬁcients are set to 0. The resulting data representation is therefore very sparse, so that operations that can take advantage of data sparsity are computa- tionally very fast if performed in wavelet space. The technique also works