These factors can make it difﬁcult to locate clusters that span the entire data space. It may be more meaningful to instead search for clusters within different subspaces of the data. For example, consider a health- informatics application where patient records contain extensive attributes describing personal information, numerous symptoms, conditions, and family history. Finding a nontrivial group of patients for which all or even most of the attributes strongly agree is unlikely. In bird ﬂu patients, for instance, the age, gender, and job attributes may vary dramatically within a wide range of values. Thus, it can be difﬁcult to ﬁnd such a cluster within the entire data space. Instead, by searching in subspaces, we may ﬁnd a cluster of similar patients in a lower-dimensional space (e.g., patients who are similar to one other with respect to symptoms like high fever, cough but no runny nose, and aged between 3 and 16). CLIQUE (CLustering In QUEst) is a simple grid-based method for ﬁnding density- based clusters in subspaces. CLIQUE partitions each dimension into nonoverlapping intervals, thereby partitioning the entire embedding space of the data objects into cells. It uses a density threshold to identify dense cells and sparse ones. A cell is dense if the number of objects mapped to it exceeds the density threshold. The main strategy behind CLIQUE for identifying a candidate search space uses the monotonicity of dense cells with respect to dimensionality. This is based on the Apriori property used in frequent pattern and association rule mining (Chapter 6). In the con- text of clusters in subspaces, the monotonicity says the following. A k-dimensional cell c (k > 1) can have at least l points only if every (k −1)-dimensional projection of c, which is a cell in a (k −1)-dimensional subspace, has at least l points. Consider Figure 10.20, where the embedding data space contains three dimensions: age, salary, and vacation. A 2-D cell, say in the subspace formed by age and salary, contains l points only if the projection of this cell in every dimension, that is, age and salary, respectively, contains at least l points. CLIQUE performs clustering in two steps. In the ﬁrst step, CLIQUE partitions the d-dimensional data space into nonoverlapping rectangular units, identifying the dense units among these. CLIQUE ﬁnds dense cells in all of the subspaces. To do so, 482 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods salary vacation age 30 50 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 vacation (week) 20 30 40 50 60 age 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 salary ($10,000) 20 30 40 50 60 age Figure 10.20 Dense units found with respect to age for the dimensions salary and vacation are intersected to provide a candidate search space for dense units of higher dimensionality. 10.6 Evaluation of Clustering 483 CLIQUE partitions every dimension into intervals, and identiﬁes intervals containing at least l points, where l is the density threshold. CLIQUE then iteratively joins two k-dimensional dense cells, c1 and c2, in subspaces (Di1,...,Dik) and (Dj1,...,Djk), respectively, if Di1 = Dj1, ..., Dik−1 = Djk−1, and c1 and c2 share the same intervals in those dimensions. The join operation generates a new (k + 1)-dimensional candidate cell c in space (Di1,...,Dik−1,Dik,Djk). CLIQUE checks whether the number of points in c passes the density threshold. The iteration terminates when no candidates can be generated or no candidate cells are dense. In the second step, CLIQUE uses the dense cells in each subspace to assemble clusters, which can be of arbitrary shape. The idea is to apply the Minimum Description Length (MDL) principle (Chapter 8) to use the maximal regions to cover connected dense cells, where a maximal region is a hyperrectangle where every cell falling into this region is dense, and the region cannot be extended further in any dimension in the subspace. Finding the best description of a cluster in general is NP-Hard. Thus, CLIQUE adopts a simple greedy approach. It starts with an arbitrary dense cell, ﬁnds a maximal region covering the cell, and then works on the remaining dense cells that have not yet been covered. The greedy method terminates when all dense cells are covered. “How effective is CLIQUE?” CLIQUE automatically ﬁnds subspaces of the highest dimensionality such that high-density clusters exist in those subspaces. It is insensitive to the order of input objects and does not presume any canonical data distribution. It scales linearly with the size of the input and has good scalability as the number of dimen- sions in the data is increased. However, obtaining a meaningful clustering is dependent on proper tuning of the grid size (which is a stable structure here) and the density threshold. This can be difﬁcult in practice because the grid size and density threshold are used across all combinations of dimensions in the data set. Thus, the accuracy of the clustering results may be degraded at the expense of the method’s simplicity. Moreover, for a given dense region, all projections of the region onto lower-dimensionality sub- spaces will also be dense. This can result in a large overlap among the reported dense regions. Furthermore, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd clusters of rather different densities within different dimensional subspaces. Several extensions to this approach follow a similar philosophy. For example, we can think of a grid as a set of ﬁxed bins. Instead of using ﬁxed bins for each of the dimensions, we can use an adaptive, data-driven strategy to dynamically determine the bins for each dimension based on data distribution statistics. Alternatively, instead of using a den- sity threshold, we may use entropy (Chapter 8) as a measure of the quality of subspace clusters. 10.6 Evaluation of Clustering By now you have learned what clustering is and know several popular clustering meth- ods. You may ask, “When I try out a clustering method on a data set, how can I evaluate whether the clustering results are good?” In general, cluster evaluation assesses 484 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods the feasibility of clustering analysis on a data set and the quality of the results generated by a clustering method. The major tasks of clustering evaluation include the following: Assessing clustering tendency. In this task, for a given data set, we assess whether a nonrandom structure exists in the data. Blindly applying a clustering method on a data set will return clusters; however, the clusters mined may be misleading. Cluster- ing analysis on a data set is meaningful only when there is a nonrandom structure in the data. Determining the number of clusters in a data set. A few algorithms, such as k-means, require the number of clusters in a data set as the parameter. Moreover, the number of clusters can be regarded as an interesting and important summary statistic of a data set. Therefore, it is desirable to estimate this number even before a clustering algorithm is used to derive detailed clusters. Measuring clustering quality. After applying a clustering method on a data set, we want to assess how good the resulting clusters are. A number of measures can be used. Some methods measure how well the clusters ﬁt the data set, while others measure how well the clusters match the ground truth, if such truth is available. There are also measures that score clusterings and thus can compare two sets of clustering results on the same data set. In the rest of this section, we discuss each of these three topics. 10.6.1 Assessing Clustering Tendency Clustering tendency assessment determines whether a given data set has a non-random structure, which may lead to meaningful clusters. Consider a data set that does not have any non-random structure, such as a set of uniformly distributed points in a data space. Even though a clustering algorithm may return clusters for the data, those clusters are random and are not meaningful. Example 10.9 Clustering requires nonuniform distribution of data. Figure 10.21 shows a data set that is uniformly distributed in 2-D data space. Although a clustering algorithm may still artiﬁcially partition the points into groups, the groups will unlikely mean anything signiﬁcant to the application due to the uniform distribution of the data. “How can we assess the clustering tendency of a data set?” Intuitively, we can try to measure the probability that the data set is generated by a uniform data distribution. This can be achieved using statistical tests for spatial randomness. To illustrate this idea, let’s look at a simple yet effective statistic called the Hopkins Statistic. The Hopkins Statistic is a spatial statistic that tests the spatial randomness of a vari- able as distributed in a space. Given a data set, D, which is regarded as a sample of 10.6 Evaluation of Clustering 485 Figure 10.21 A data set that is uniformly distributed in the data space. a random variable, o, we want to determine how far away o is from being uniformly distributed in the data space. We calculate the Hopkins Statistic as follows: 1. Sample n points, p1, ..., pn, uniformly from D. That is, each point in D has the same probability of being included in this sample. For each point, pi, we ﬁnd the nearest neighbor of pi (1 ≤i ≤n) in D, and let xi be the distance between pi and its nearest neighbor in D. That is, xi = min v∈D{dist(pi,v)}. (10.25) 2. Sample n points, q1, ..., qn, uniformly from D. For each qi (1 ≤i ≤n), we ﬁnd the nearest neighbor of qi in D −{qi}, and let yi be the distance between qi and its nearest neighbor in D−{qi}. That is, yi = min v∈D,v̸=qi {dist(qi,v)}. (10.26) 3. Calculate the Hopkins Statistic, H, as H = Pn i=1 yi Pn i=1 xi + Pn i=1 yi . (10.27) “What does the Hopkins Statistic tell us about how likely data set D follows a uni- form distribution in the data space?” If D were uniformly distributed, then Pn i=1 yi and Pn i=1 xi would be close to each other, and thus H would be about 0.5. However, if D were highly skewed, then Pn i=1 yi would be substantially smaller than Pn i=1 xi in expectation, and thus H would be close to 0. 486 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods Our null hypothesis is the homogeneous hypothesis—that D is uniformly distributed and thus contains no meaningful clusters. The nonhomogeneous hypothesis (i.e., that D is not uniformly distributed and thus contains clusters) is the alternative hypothesis. We can conduct the Hopkins Statistic test iteratively, using 0.5 as the threshold to reject the alternative hypothesis. That is, if H > 0.5, then it is unlikely that D has statistically signiﬁcant clusters. 10.6.2 Determining the Number of Clusters Determining the “right” number of clusters in a data set is important, not only because some clustering algorithms like k-means require such a parameter, but also because the appropriate number of clusters controls the proper granularity of cluster analysis. It can be regarded as ﬁnding a good balance between compressibility and accuracy in cluster analysis. Consider two extreme cases. What if you were to treat the entire data set as a cluster? This would maximize the compression of the data, but such a cluster analysis has no value. On the other hand, treating each object in a data set as a cluster gives the ﬁnest clustering resolution (i.e., most accurate due to the zero distance between an object and the corresponding cluster center). In some methods like k-means, this even achieves the best cost. However, having one object per cluster does not enable any data summarization. Determining the number of clusters is far from easy, often because the “right” num- ber is ambiguous. Figuring out what the right number of clusters should be often depends on the distribution’s shape and scale in the data set, as well as the cluster- ing resolution required by the user. There are many possible ways to estimate the number of clusters. Here, we brieﬂy introduce a few simple yet popular and effective methods. A simple method is to set the number of clusters to about q n 2 for a data set of n points. In expectation, each cluster has √ 2n points. The elbow method is based on the observation that increasing the number of clusters can help to reduce the sum of within-cluster variance of each cluster. This is because having more clusters allows one to capture ﬁner groups of data objects that are more similar to each other. However, the marginal effect of reducing the sum of within-cluster variances may drop if too many clusters are formed, because splitting a cohesive cluster into two gives only a small reduction. Consequently, a heuristic for selecting the right number of clusters is to use the turning point in the curve of the sum of within-cluster variances with respect to the number of clusters. Technically, given a number, k > 0, we can form k clusters on the data set in ques- tion using a clustering algorithm like k-means, and calculate the sum of within-cluster variances, var(k). We can then plot the curve of var with respect to k. The ﬁrst (or most signiﬁcant) turning point of the curve suggests the “right” number. More advanced methods can determine the number of clusters using information criteria or information theoretic approaches. Please refer to the bibliographic notes for further information (Section 10.9). 10.6 Evaluation of Clustering 487 The “right” number of clusters in a data set can also be determined by cross- validation, a technique often used in classiﬁcation (Chapter 8). First, divide the given data set, D, into m parts. Next, use m −1 parts to build a clustering model, and use the remaining part to test the quality of the clustering. For example, for each point in the test set, we can ﬁnd the closest centroid. Consequently, we can use the sum of the squared distances between all points in the test set and the closest centroids to measure how well the clustering model ﬁts the test set. For any integer k > 0, we repeat this pro- cess m times to derive clusterings of k clusters by using each part in turn as the test set. The average of the quality measure is taken as the overall quality measure. We can then compare the overall quality measure with respect to different values of k, and ﬁnd the number of clusters that best ﬁts the data. 10.6.3 Measuring Clustering Quality Suppose you have assessed the clustering tendency of a given data set. You may have also tried to predetermine the number of clusters in the set. You can now apply one or multiple clustering methods to obtain clusterings of the data set. “How good is the clustering generated by a method, and how can we compare the clusterings generated by different methods?” We have a few methods to choose from for measuring the quality of a clustering. In general, these methods can be categorized into two groups according to whether ground truth is available. Here, ground truth is the ideal clustering that is often built using human experts. If ground truth is available, it can be used by extrinsic methods, which compare the clustering against the group truth and measure. If the ground truth is unavailable, we can use intrinsic methods, which evaluate the goodness of a clustering by considering how well the clusters are separated. Ground truth can be considered as supervision in the form of “cluster labels.” Hence, extrinsic methods are also known as supervised methods, while intrinsic methods are unsupervised methods. Let’s have a look at simple methods from each category. Extrinsic Methods When the ground truth is available, we can compare it with a clustering to assess the clustering. Thus, the core task in extrinsic methods is to assign a score, Q(C,Cg), to a clustering, C, given the ground truth, Cg. Whether an extrinsic method is effective largely depends on the measure, Q, it uses. In general, a measure Q on clustering quality is effective if it satisﬁes the following four essential criteria: Cluster homogeneity. This requires that the more pure the clusters in a clustering are, the better the clustering. Suppose that ground truth says that the objects in a data set, D, can belong to categories L1,...,Ln. Consider clustering, C1, wherein a cluster C ∈C1 contains objects from two categories Li,Lj (1 ≤i < j ≤n). Also 488 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods consider clustering C2, which is identical to C1 except that C2 is split into two clusters containing the objects in Li and Lj, respectively. A clustering quality measure, Q, respecting cluster homogeneity should give a higher score to C2 than C1, that is, Q(C2,Cg) > Q(C1,Cg). Cluster completeness. This is the counterpart of cluster homogeneity. Cluster com- pleteness requires that for a clustering, if any two objects belong to the same category according to ground truth, then they should be assigned to the same cluster. Cluster completeness requires that a clustering should assign objects belonging to the same category (according to ground truth) to the same cluster. Consider clustering C1, which contains clusters C1 and C2, of which the members belong to the same category according to ground truth. Let clustering C2 be identical to C1 except that C1 and C2 are merged into one cluster in C2. Then, a clustering quality measure, Q, respecting cluster completeness should give a higher score to C2, that is, Q(C2,Cg) > Q(C1,Cg). Rag bag. In many practical scenarios, there is often a “rag bag” category contain- ing objects that cannot be merged with other objects. Such a category is often called “miscellaneous,” “other,” and so on. The rag bag criterion states that putting a het- erogeneous object into a pure cluster should be penalized more than putting it into a rag bag. Consider a clustering C1 and a cluster C ∈C1 such that all objects in C except for one, denoted by o, belong to the same category according to ground truth. Consider a clustering C2 identical to C1 except that o is assigned to a cluster C′ ̸= C in C2 such that C′ contains objects from various categories according to ground truth, and thus is noisy. In other words, C′ in C2 is a rag bag. Then, a clustering quality measure Q respecting the rag bag criterion should give a higher score to C2, that is, Q(C2,Cg) > Q(C1,Cg). Small cluster preservation. If a small category is split into small pieces in a cluster- ing, those small pieces may likely become noise and thus the small category cannot be discovered from the clustering. The small cluster preservation criterion states that splitting a small category into pieces is more harmful than splitting a large category into pieces. Consider an extreme case. Let D be a data set of n + 2 objects such that, according to ground truth, n objects, denoted by o1, ..., on, belong to one cate- gory and the other two objects, denoted by on+1,on+2, belong to another cate- gory. Suppose clustering C1 has three clusters, C1 = {o1, ..., on}, C2 = {on+1}, and C3 = {on+2}. Let clustering C2 have three clusters, too, namely C1 = {o1, ..., on−1}, C2 = {on}, and C3 = {on+1,on+2}. In other words, C1 splits the small category and C2 splits the big category. A clustering quality measure Q preserving small clusters should give a higher score to C2, that is, Q(C2,Cg) > Q(C1,Cg). Many clustering quality measures satisfy some of these four criteria. Here, we introduce the BCubed precision and recall metrics, which satisfy all four criteria. BCubed evaluates the precision and recall for every object in a clustering on a given data set according to ground truth. The precision of an object indicates how many other objects in the same cluster belong to the same category as the object. The recall 10.6 Evaluation of Clustering 489 of an object reﬂects how many objects of the same category are assigned to the same cluster. Formally, let D={o1, ..., on} be a set of objects, and C be a clustering on D. Let L(oi) (1 ≤i ≤n) be the category of oi given by ground truth, and C(oi) be the cluster ID of oi in C. Then, for two objects, oi and oj, (1 ≤i,j,≤n,i ̸= j), the correctness of the relation between oi and oj in clustering C is given by Correctness(oi,oj) = ( 1 if L(oi) = L(oj) ⇔C(oi) = C(oj) 0 otherwise. (10.28) BCubed precision is deﬁned as Precision BCubed = n X i=1 X oj:i̸=j,C(oi)=C(oj) Correctness(oi,oj) ∥{oj|i ̸= j,C(oi) = C(oj)}∥ n . (10.29) BCubed recall is deﬁned as Recall BCubed = n X i=1 X oj:i̸=j,L(oi)=L(oj) Correctness(oi,oj) ∥{oj|i ̸= j,L(oi) = L(oj)}∥ n . (10.30) Intrinsic Methods When the ground truth of a data set is not available, we have to use an intrinsic method to assess the clustering quality. In general, intrinsic methods evaluate a clustering by examining how well the clusters are separated and how compact the clusters are. Many intrinsic methods have the advantage of a similarity metric between objects in the data set. The silhouette coefﬁcient is such a measure. For a data set, D, of n objects, suppose D is partitioned into k clusters, C1,...,Ck. For each object o ∈D, we calculate a(o) as the average distance between o and all other objects in the cluster to which o belongs. Similarly, b(o) is the minimum average distance from o to all clusters to which o does not belong. Formally, suppose o ∈Ci (1 ≤i ≤k); then a(o) = P o′∈Ci,o̸=o′ dist(o,o′) |Ci| −1 (10.31) 490 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods and b(o) = min Cj:1≤j≤k,j̸=i (P o′∈Cj dist(o,o′) |Cj| ) . (10.32) The silhouette coefﬁcient of o is then deﬁned as s(o) = b(o) −a(o) max{a(o),b(o)}. (10.33) The value of the silhouette coefﬁcient is between −1 and 1. The value of a(o) reﬂects the compactness of the cluster to which o belongs. The smaller the value, the more com- pact the cluster. The value of b(o) captures the degree to which o is separated from other clusters. The larger b(o) is, the more separated o is from other clusters. Therefore, when the silhouette coefﬁcient value of o approaches 1, the cluster containing o is compact and o is far away from other clusters, which is the preferable case. However, when the silhouette coefﬁcient value is negative (i.e., b(o) < a(o)), this means that, in expectation, o is closer to the objects in another cluster than to the objects in the same cluster as o. In many cases, this is a bad situation and should be avoided. To measure a cluster’s ﬁtness within a clustering, we can compute the average silhou- ette coefﬁcient value of all objects in the cluster. To measure the quality of a clustering, we can use the average silhouette coefﬁcient value of all objects in the data set. The sil- houette coefﬁcient and other intrinsic measures can also be used in the elbow method to heuristically derive the number of clusters in a data set by replacing the sum of within-cluster variances. 10.7 Summary A cluster is a collection of data objects that are similar to one another within the same cluster and are dissimilar to the objects in other clusters. The process of grouping a set of physical or abstract objects into classes of similar objects is called clustering. Cluster analysis has extensive applications, including business intelligence, image pattern recognition, Web search, biology, and security. Cluster analysis can be used as a standalone data mining tool to gain insight into the data distribution, or as a preprocessing step for other data mining algorithms operating on the detected clusters. Clustering is a dynamic ﬁeld of research in data mining. It is related to unsupervised learning in machine learning. Clustering is a challenging ﬁeld. Typical requirements of it include scalability, the ability to deal with different types of data and attributes, the discovery of clus- ters in arbitrary shape, minimal requirements for domain knowledge to determine input parameters, the ability to deal with noisy data, incremental clustering and 10.8 Exercises 491 insensitivity to input order, the capability of clustering high-dimensionality data, constraint-based clustering, as well as interpretability and usability. Many clustering algorithms have been developed. These can be categorized from several orthogonal aspects such as those regarding partitioning criteria, separation of clusters, similarity measures used, and clustering space. This chapter discusses major fundamental clustering methods of the following categories: partitioning methods, hierarchical methods, density-based methods, and grid-based methods. Some algorithms may belong to more than one category. A partitioning method ﬁrst creates an initial set of k partitions, where parame- ter k is the number of partitions to construct. It then uses an iterative relocation technique that attempts to improve the partitioning by moving objects from one group to another. Typical partitioning methods include k-means, k-medoids, and CLARANS. A hierarchical method creates a hierarchical decomposition of the given set of data objects. The method can be classiﬁed as being either agglomerative (bottom-up) or divisive (top-down), based on how the hierarchical decomposition is formed. To compensate for the rigidity of merge or split, the quality of hierarchical agglome- ration can be improved by analyzing object linkages at each hierarchical partitioning (e.g., in Chameleon), or by ﬁrst performing microclustering (that is, grouping objects into “microclusters”) and then operating on the microclusters with other clustering techniques such as iterative relocation (as in BIRCH). A density-based method clusters objects based on the notion of density. It grows clusters either according to the density of neighborhood objects (e.g., in DBSCAN) or according to a density function (e.g., in DENCLUE). OPTICS is a density-based method that generates an augmented ordering of the data’s clustering structure. A grid-based method ﬁrst quantizes the object space into a ﬁnite number of cells that form a grid structure, and then performs clustering on the grid structure. STING is a typical example of a grid-based method based on statistical information stored in grid cells. CLIQUE is a grid-based and subspace clustering algorithm. Clustering evaluation assesses the feasibility of clustering analysis on a data set and the quality of the results generated by a clustering method. The tasks include assessing clustering tendency, determining the number of clusters, and measuring clustering quality. 10.8 Exercises 10.1 Brieﬂy describe and give examples of each of the following approaches to cluster- ing: partitioning methods, hierarchical methods, density-based methods, and grid-based methods. 492 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods 10.2 Suppose that the data mining task is to cluster points (with (x,y) representing location) into three clusters, where the points are A1(2,10),A2(2,5),A3(8,4),B1(5,8),B2(7,5),B3(6,4),C1(1,2),C2(4,9). The distance function is Euclidean distance. Suppose initially we assign A1, B1, and C1 as the center of each cluster, respectively. Use the k-means algorithm to show only (a) The three cluster centers after the ﬁrst round of execution. (b) The ﬁnal three clusters. 10.3 Use an example to show why the k-means algorithm may not ﬁnd the global optimum, that is, optimizing the within-cluster variation. 10.4 For the k-means algorithm, it is interesting to note that by choosing the initial cluster centers carefully, we may be able to not only speed up the algorithm’s convergence, but also guarantee the quality of the ﬁnal clustering. The k-means++ algorithm is a vari- ant of k-means, which chooses the initial centers as follows. First, it selects one center uniformly at random from the objects in the data set. Iteratively, for each object p other than the chosen center, it chooses an object as the new center. This object is chosen at random with probability proportional to dist(p)2, where dist(p) is the distance from p to the closest center that has already been chosen. The iteration continues until k centers are selected. Explain why this method will not only speed up the convergence of the k-means algorithm, but also guarantee the quality of the ﬁnal clustering results. 10.5 Provide the pseudocode of the object reassignment step of the PAM algorithm. 10.6 Both k-means and k-medoids algorithms can perform effective clustering. (a) Illustrate the strength and weakness of k-means in comparison with k-medoids. (b) Illustrate the strength and weakness of these schemes in comparison with a hierar- chical clustering scheme (e.g., AGNES). 10.7 Prove that in DBSCAN, the density-connectedness is an equivalence relation. 10.8 Prove that in DBSCAN, for a ﬁxed MinPts value and two neighborhood thresholds, ϵ1 < ϵ2, a cluster C with respect to ϵ1 and MinPts must be a subset of a cluster C′ with respect to ϵ2 and MinPts. 10.9 Provide the pseudocode of the OPTICS algorithm. 10.10 Why is it that BIRCH encounters difﬁculties in ﬁnding clusters of arbitrary shape but OPTICS does not? Propose modiﬁcations to BIRCH to help it ﬁnd clusters of arbitrary shape. 10.11 Provide the pseudocode of the step in CLIQUE that ﬁnds dense cells in all subspaces. 10.8 Exercises 493 10.12 Present conditions under which density-based clustering is more suitable than partitioning-based clustering and hierarchical clustering. Give application examples to support your argument. 10.13 Give an example of how speciﬁc clustering methods can be integrated, for example, where one clustering algorithm is used as a preprocessing step for another. In addi- tion, provide reasoning as to why the integration of two methods may sometimes lead to improved clustering quality and efﬁciency. 10.14 Clustering is recognized as an important data mining task with broad applications. Give one application example for each of the following cases: (a) An application that uses clustering as a major data mining function. (b) An application that uses clustering as a preprocessing tool for data preparation for other data mining tasks. 10.15 Data cubes and multidimensional databases contain nominal, ordinal, and numeric data in hierarchical or aggregate forms. Based on what you have learned about the clustering methods, design a clustering method that ﬁnds clusters in large data cubes effectively and efﬁciently. 10.16 Describe each of the following clustering algorithms in terms of the following crite- ria: (1) shapes of clusters that can be determined; (2) input parameters that must be speciﬁed; and (3) limitations. (a) k-means (b) k-medoids (c) CLARA (d) BIRCH (e) CHAMELEON (f) DBSCAN 10.17 Human eyes are fast and effective at judging the quality of clustering methods for 2-D data. Can you design a data visualization method that may help humans visua- lize data clusters and judge the clustering quality for 3-D data? What about for even higher-dimensional data? 10.18 Suppose that you are to allocate a number of automatic teller machines (ATMs) in a given region so as to satisfy a number of constraints. Households or workplaces may be clustered so that typically one ATM is assigned per cluster. The clustering, however, may be constrained by two factors: (1) obstacle objects (i.e., there are bridges, rivers, and highways that can affect ATM accessibility), and (2) additional user-speciﬁed constraints such as that each ATM should serve at least 10,000 households. How can a clustering algorithm such as k-means be modiﬁed for quality clustering under both constraints? 10.19 For constraint-based clustering, aside from having the minimum number of customers in each cluster (for ATM allocation) as a constraint, there can be many other kinds of 494 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods constraints. For example, a constraint could be in the form of the maximum number of customers per cluster, average income of customers per cluster, maximum distance between every two clusters, and so on. Categorize the kinds of constraints that can be imposed on the clusters produced and discuss how to perform clustering efﬁciently under such kinds of constraints. 10.20 Design a privacy-preserving clustering method so that a data owner would be able to ask a third party to mine the data for quality clustering without worrying about the potential inappropriate disclosure of certain private or sensitive information stored in the data. 10.21 Show that BCubed metrics satisfy the four essential requirements for extrinsic clustering evaluation methods. 10.9 Bibliographic Notes Clustering has been extensively studied for over 40 years and across many disciplines due to its broad applications. Most books on pattern classiﬁcation and machine learn- ing contain chapters on cluster analysis or unsupervised learning. Several textbooks are dedicated to the methods of cluster analysis, including Hartigan [Har75]; Jain and Dubes [JD88]; Kaufman and Rousseeuw [KR90]; and Arabie, Hubert, and De Sorte [AHS96]. There are also many survey articles on different aspects of clustering methods. Recent ones include Jain, Murty, and Flynn [JMF99]; Parsons, Haque, and Liu [PHL04]; and Jain [Jai10]. For partitioning methods, the k-means algorithm was ﬁrst introduced by Lloyd [Llo57], and then by MacQueen [Mac67]. Arthur and Vassilvitskii [AV07] presented the k-means++ algorithm. A ﬁltering algorithm, which uses a spatial hierarchical data index to speed up the computation of cluster means, is given in Kanungo, Mount, Netanyahu, et al. [KMN+02]. The k-medoids algorithms of PAM and CLARA were proposed by Kaufman and Rousseeuw [KR90]. The k-modes (for clustering nominal data) and k-prototypes (for clustering hybrid data) algorithms were proposed by Huang [Hua98]. The k-modes clus- tering algorithm was also proposed independently by Chaturvedi, Green, and Carroll [CGC94, CGC01]. The CLARANS algorithm was proposed by Ng and Han [NH94]. Ester, Kriegel, and Xu [EKX95] proposed techniques for further improvement of the performance of CLARANS using efﬁcient spatial access methods such as R∗-tree and focusing techniques. A k-means-based scalable clustering algorithm was proposed by Bradley, Fayyad, and Reina [BFR98]. An early survey of agglomerative hierarchical clustering algorithms was conducted by Day and Edelsbrunner [DE84]. Agglomerative hierarchical clustering, such as AGNES, and divisive hierarchical clustering, such as DIANA, were introduced by Kaufman and Rousseeuw [KR90]. An interesting direction for improving the clustering quality of hier- archical clustering methods is to integrate hierarchical clustering with distance-based iterative relocation or other nonhierarchical clustering methods. For example, BIRCH, by Zhang, Ramakrishnan, and Livny [ZRL96], ﬁrst performs hierarchical clustering with 10.9 Bibliographic Notes 495 a CF-tree before applying other techniques. Hierarchical clustering can also be per- formed by sophisticated linkage analysis, transformation, or nearest-neighbor analysis, such as CURE by Guha, Rastogi, and Shim [GRS98]; ROCK (for clustering nominal attributes) by Guha, Rastogi, and Shim [GRS99]; and Chameleon by Karypis, Han, and Kumar [KHK99]. A probabilistic hierarchical clustering framework following normal linkage algo- rithms and using probabilistic models to deﬁne cluster similarity was developed by Friedman [Fri03] and Heller and Ghahramani [HG05]. For density-based clustering methods, DBSCAN was proposed by Ester, Kriegel, Sander, and Xu [EKSX96]. Ankerst, Breunig, Kriegel, and Sander [ABKS99] developed OPTICS, a cluster-ordering method that facilitates density-based clustering without worrying about parameter speciﬁcation. The DENCLUE algorithm, based on a set of density distribution functions, was proposed by Hinneburg and Keim [HK98]. Hinneburg and Gabriel [HG07] developed DENCLUE 2.0, which includes a new hill-climbing procedure for Gaussian kernels that adjusts the step size automatically. STING, a grid-based multiresolution approach that collects statistical information in grid cells, was proposed by Wang, Yang, and Muntz [WYM97]. WaveCluster, deve- loped by Sheikholeslami, Chatterjee, and Zhang [SCZ98], is a multiresolution clustering approach that transforms the original feature space by wavelet transform. Scalable methods for clustering nominal data were studied by Gibson, Kleinberg, and Raghavan [GKR98]; Guha, Rastogi, and Shim [GRS99]; and Ganti, Gehrke, and Ramakrishnan [GGR99]. There are also many other clustering paradigms. For exam- ple, fuzzy clustering methods are discussed in Kaufman and Rousseeuw [KR90], Bezdek [Bez81], and Bezdek and Pal [BP92]. For high-dimensional clustering, an Apriori-based dimension-growth subspace clus- tering algorithm called CLIQUE was proposed by Agrawal, Gehrke, Gunopulos, and Raghavan [AGGR98]. It integrates density-based and grid-based clustering methods. Recent studies have proceeded to clustering stream data Babcock, Badu, Datar, et al. [BBD+02]. A k-median-based data stream clustering algorithm was proposed by Guha, Mishra, Motwani, and O’Callaghan [GMMO00] and by O’Callaghan et al. [OMM+02]. A method for clustering evolving data streams was proposed by Aggarwal, Han, Wang, and Yu [AHWY03]. A framework for projected clustering of high-dimensional data streams was proposed by Aggarwal, Han, Wang, and Yu [AHWY04a]. Clustering evaluation is discussed in a few monographs and survey articles such as Jain and Dubes [JD88] and Halkidi, Batistakis, and Vazirgiannis [HBV01]. The extrin- sic methods for clustering quality evaluation are extensively explored. Some recent stu- dies include Meilˇa [Mei03, Mei05] and Amig´o, Gonzalo, Artiles, and Verdejo [AGAV09]. The four essential criteria introduced in this chapter are formulated in Amig´o, Gonzalo, Artiles, and Verdejo [AGAV09], while some individual criteria were also mentioned ear- lier, for example, in Meilˇa [Mei03] and Rosenberg and Hirschberg [RH07]. Bagga and Baldwin [BB98] introduced the BCubed metrics. The silhouette coefﬁcient is described in Kaufman and Rousseeuw [KR90]. This page intentionally left blank 11 Advanced Cluster Analysis You learned the fundamentals of cluster analysis in Chapter 10. In this chapter, we discuss advanced topics of cluster analysis. Speciﬁcally, we investigate four major perspectives: Probabilistic model-based clustering: Section 11.1 introduces a general framework and a method for deriving clusters where each object is assigned a probability of belonging to a cluster. Probabilistic model-based clustering is widely used in many data mining applications such as text mining. Clustering high-dimensional data: When the dimensionality is high, conventional distance measures can be dominated by noise. Section 11.2 introduces fundamental methods for cluster analysis on high-dimensional data. Clustering graph and network data: Graph and network data are increasingly pop- ular in applications such as online social networks, the World Wide Web, and digital libraries. In Section 11.3, you will study the key issues in clustering graph and network data, including similarity measurement and clustering methods. Clustering with constraints: In our discussion so far, we do not assume any con- straints in clustering. In some applications, however, various constraints may exist. These constraints may rise from background knowledge or spatial distribution of the objects. You will learn how to conduct cluster analysis with different kinds of constraints in Section 11.4. By the end of this chapter, you will have a good grasp of the issues and techniques regarding advanced cluster analysis. 11.1 Probabilistic Model-Based Clustering In all the cluster analysis methods we have discussed so far, each data object can be assigned to only one of a number of clusters. This cluster assignment rule is required in some applications such as assigning customers to marketing managers. However, c⃝2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques 497 498 Chapter 11 Advanced Cluster Analysis in other applications, this rigid requirement may not be desirable. In this section, we demonstrate the need for fuzzy or ﬂexible cluster assignment in some applications, and introduce a general method to compute probabilistic clusters and assignments. “In what situations may a data object belong to more than one cluster?” Consider Example 11.1. Example 11.1 Clustering product reviews. AllElectronics has an online store, where customers not only purchase online, but also create reviews of products. Not every product receives reviews; instead, some products may have many reviews, while many others have none or only a few. Moreover, a review may involve multiple products. Thus, as the review editor of AllElectronics, your task is to cluster the reviews. Ideally, a cluster is about a topic, for example, a group of products, services, or issues that are highly related. Assigning a review to one cluster exclusively would not work well for your task. Suppose there is a cluster for “cameras and camcorders” and another for “computers.” What if a review talks about the compatibility between a camcorder and a computer? The review relates to both clusters; however, it does not exclusively belong to either cluster. You would like to use a clustering method that allows a review to belong to more than one cluster if the review indeed involves more than one topic. To reﬂect the strength that a review belongs to a cluster, you want the assignment of a review to a cluster to carry a weight representing the partial membership. The scenario where an object may belong to multiple clusters occurs often in many applications. This is illustrated in Example 11.2. Example 11.2 Clustering to study user search intent. The AllElectronics online store records all cus- tomer browsing and purchasing behavior in a log. An important data mining task is to use the log data to categorize and understand user search intent. For example, con- sider a user session (a short period in which a user interacts with the online store). Is the user searching for a product, making comparisons among different products, or looking for customer support information? Clustering analysis helps here because it is difﬁcult to predeﬁne user behavior patterns thoroughly. A cluster that contains similar user browsing trajectories may represent similar user behavior. However, not every session belongs to only one cluster. For example, suppose user sessions involving the purchase of digital cameras form one cluster, and user sessions that compare laptop computers form another cluster. What if a user in one session makes an order for a digital camera, and at the same time compares several laptop computers? Such a session should belong to both clusters to some extent. In this section, we systematically study the theme of clustering that allows an object to belong to more than one cluster. We start with the notion of fuzzy clusters in Section 11.1.1. We then generalize the concept to probabilistic model-based clusters in Section 11.1.2. In Section 11.1.3, we introduce the expectation-maximization algorithm, a general framework for mining such clusters. 11.1 Probabilistic Model-Based Clustering 499 11.1.1 Fuzzy Clusters Given a set of objects, X = {x1,...,xn}, a fuzzy set S is a subset of X that allows each object in X to have a membership degree between 0 and 1. Formally, a fuzzy set, S, can be modeled as a function, FS:X →[0,1]. Example 11.3 Fuzzy set. The more digital camera units that are sold, the more popular the camera is. In AllElectronics, we can use the following formula to compute the degree of popularity of a digital camera, o, given the sales of o: pop(o) = ( 1 if 1000 or more units of o are sold i 1000 if i (i < 1000) units of o are sold. (11.1) Function pop() deﬁnes a fuzzy set of popular digital cameras. For example, suppose the sales of digital cameras at AllElectronics are as shown in Table 11.1. The fuzzy set of popular digital cameras is {A(0.05),B(1),C(0.86),D(0.27)}, where the degrees of membership are written in parentheses. We can apply the fuzzy set idea on clusters. That is, given a set of objects, a cluster is a fuzzy set of objects. Such a cluster is called a fuzzy cluster. Consequently, a clustering contains multiple fuzzy clusters. Formally, given a set of objects, o1,...,on, a fuzzy clustering of k fuzzy clusters, C1,...,Ck, can be represented using a partition matrix, M = [wij] (1 ≤i ≤n,1 ≤ j ≤k), where wij is the membership degree of oi in fuzzy cluster Cj. The partition matrix should satisfy the following three requirements: For each object, oi, and cluster, Cj, 0 ≤wij ≤1. This requirement enforces that a fuzzy cluster is a fuzzy set. For each object, oi, k X j=1 wij = 1. This requirement ensures that every object partici- pates in the clustering equivalently. Table 11.1 Set of Digital Cameras and Their Sales at AllElectronics Camera Sales (units) A 50 B 1320 C 860 D 270 500 Chapter 11 Advanced Cluster Analysis For each cluster, Cj, 0 < n X i=1 wij < n. This requirement ensures that for every cluster, there is at least one object for which the membership value is nonzero. Example 11.4 Fuzzy clusters. Suppose the AllElectronics online store has six reviews. The keywords contained in these reviews are listed in Table 11.2. We can group the reviews into two fuzzy clusters, C1 and C2. C1 is for “digital camera” and “lens,” and C2 is for “computer.” The partition matrix is M =   1 0 1 0 1 0 2 3 1 3 0 1 0 1   . Here, we use the keywords “digital camera” and “lens” as the features of cluster C1, and “computer” as the feature of cluster C2. For review, Ri, and cluster, Cj (1 ≤i ≤6,1 ≤ j ≤2), wij is deﬁned as wij = |Ri ∩Cj| |Ri ∩(C1 ∪C2)| = |Ri ∩Cj| |Ri ∩{digital camera,lens,computer}|. In this fuzzy clustering, review R4 belongs to clusters C1 and C2 with membership degrees 2 3 and 1 3, respectively. “How can we evaluate how well a fuzzy clustering describes a data set?” Consider a set of objects, o1,...,on, and a fuzzy clustering C of k clusters, C1,...,Ck. Let M = [wij] (1 ≤ i ≤n,1 ≤j ≤k) be the partition matrix. Let c1,...,ck be the centers of clusters C1,...,Ck, respectively. Here, a center can be deﬁned either as the mean or the medoid, or in other ways speciﬁc to the application. As discussed in Chapter 10, the distance or similarity between an object and the cen- ter of the cluster to which the object is assigned can be used to measure how well the Table 11.2 Set of Reviews and the Keywords Used Review ID Keywords R1 digital camera, lens R2 digital camera R3 lens R4 digital camera, lens, computer R5 computer, CPU R6 computer, computer game 11.1 Probabilistic Model-Based Clustering 501 object belongs to the cluster. This idea can be extended to fuzzy clustering. For any object, oi, and cluster, Cj, if wij > 0, then dist(oi,cj) measures how well oi is represented by cj, and thus belongs to cluster Cj. Because an object can participate in more than one cluster, the sum of distances to the corresponding cluster centers weighted by the degrees of membership captures how well the object ﬁts the clustering. Formally, for an object oi, the sum of the squared error (SSE) is given by SSE(oi) = k X j=1 w p ij dist(oi,cj)2, (11.2) where the parameter p(p ≥1) controls the inﬂuence of the degrees of membership. The larger the value of p, the larger the inﬂuence of the degrees of membership. Orthogonally, the SSE for a cluster, Cj, is SSE(Cj) = n X i=1 w p ij dist(oi,cj)2. (11.3) Finally, the SSE of the clustering is deﬁned as SSE(C) = n X i=1 k X j=1 w p ij dist(oi,cj)2. (11.4) The SSE can be used to measure how well a fuzzy clustering ﬁts a data set. Fuzzy clustering is also called soft clustering because it allows an object to belong to more than one cluster. It is easy to see that traditional (rigid) clustering, which enforces each object to belong to only one cluster exclusively, is a special case of fuzzy clustering. We defer the discussion of how to compute fuzzy clustering to Section 11.1.3. 11.1.2 Probabilistic Model-Based Clusters “Fuzzy clusters (Section 11.1.1) provide the ﬂexibility of allowing an object to participate in multiple clusters. Is there a general framework to specify clusterings where objects may participate in multiple clusters in a probabilistic way?” In this section, we introduce the general notion of probabilistic model-based clusters to answer this question. As discussed in Chapter 10, we conduct cluster analysis on a data set because we assume that the objects in the data set in fact belong to different inherent categories. Recall that clustering tendency analysis (Section 10.6.1) can be used to examine whether a data set contains objects that may lead to meaningful clusters. Here, the inherent cat- egories hidden in the data are latent, which means they cannot be directly observed. Instead, we have to infer them using the data observed. For example, the topics hidden in a set of reviews in the AllElectronics online store are latent because one cannot read the topics directly. However, the topics can be inferred from the reviews because each review is about one or multiple topics. 502 Chapter 11 Advanced Cluster Analysis Therefore, the goal of cluster analysis is to ﬁnd hidden categories. A data set that is the subject of cluster analysis can be regarded as a sample of the possible instances of the hidden categories, but without any category labels. The clusters derived from cluster analysis are inferred using the data set, and are designed to approach the hidden categories. Statistically, we can assume that a hidden category is a distribution over the data space, which can be mathematically represented using a probability density function (or distribution function). We call such a hidden category a probabilistic cluster. For a probabilistic cluster, C, its probability density function, f , and a point, o, in the data space, f (o) is the relative likelihood that an instance of C appears at o. Example 11.5 Probabilistic clusters. Suppose the digital cameras sold by AllElectronics can be divided into two categories: C1, a consumer line (e.g., point-and-shoot cameras), and C2, a professional line (e.g., single-lens reﬂex cameras). Their respective probability density functions, f1 and f2, are shown in Figure 11.1 with respect to the attribute price. For a price value of, say, $1000, f1(1000) is the relative likelihood that the price of a consumer-line camera is $1000. Similarly, f2(1000) is the relative likelihood that the price of a professional-line camera is $1000. The probability density functions, f1 and f2, cannot be observed directly. Instead, AllElectronics can only infer these distributions by analyzing the prices of the digital cameras it sells. Moreover, a camera often does not come with a well-determined cate- gory (e.g., “consumer line” or “professional line”). Instead, such categories are typically based on user background knowledge and can vary. For example, a camera in the pro- sumer segment may be regarded at the high end of the consumer line by some customers, and the low end of the professional line by others. As an analyst at AllElectronics, you can consider each category as a probabilistic clus- ter, and conduct cluster analysis on the price of cameras to approach these categories. 1000 price Probability Consumer line Professional line Figure 11.1 The probability density functions of two probabilistic clusters. 11.1 Probabilistic Model-Based Clustering 503 Suppose we want to ﬁnd k probabilistic clusters, C1,...,Ck, through cluster analysis. For a data set, D, of n objects, we can regard D as a ﬁnite sample of the possible instances of the clusters. Conceptually, we can assume that D is formed as follows. Each cluster, Cj (1 ≤j ≤k), is associated with a probability, ωj, that some instance is sampled from the cluster. It is often assumed that ω1,...,ωk are given as part of the problem setting, and that Pk j=1 ωj = 1, which ensures that all objects are generated by the k clusters. Here, parameter ωj captures background knowledge about the relative population of cluster Cj. We then run the following two steps to generate an object in D. The steps are executed n times in total to generate n objects, o1,...,on, in D. 1. Choose a cluster, Cj, according to probabilities ω1,...,ωk. 2. Choose an instance of Cj according to its probability density function, fj. The data generation process here is the basic assumption in mixture models. Formally, a mixture model assumes that a set of observed objects is a mixture of instances from multiple probabilistic clusters. Conceptually, each observed object is generated indepen- dently by two steps: ﬁrst choosing a probabilistic cluster according to the probabilities of the clusters, and then choosing a sample according to the probability density function of the chosen cluster. Given data set, D, and k, the number of clusters required, the task of probabilistic model-based cluster analysis is to infer a set of k probabilistic clusters that is most likely to generate D using this data generation process. An important question remaining is how we can measure the likelihood that a set of k probabilistic clusters and their probabilities will generate an observed data set. Consider a set, C, of k probabilistic clusters, C1,...,Ck, with probability density functions f1,...,fk, respectively, and their probabilities, ω1,...,ωk. For an object, o, the probability that o is generated by cluster Cj (1 ≤j ≤k) is given by P(o|Cj) = ωjfj(o). Therefore, the probability that o is generated by the set C of clusters is P(o|C) = k X j=1 ωjfj(o). (11.5) Since the objects are assumed to have been generated independently, for a data set, D = {o1,...,on}, of n objects, we have P(D|C) = n Y i=1 P(oi|C) = n Y i=1 k X j=1 ωjfj(oi). (11.6) Now, it is clear that the task of probabilistic model-based cluster analysis on a data set, D, is to ﬁnd a set C of k probabilistic clusters such that P(D|C) is maximized. Maxi- mizing P(D|C) is often intractable because, in general, the probability density function 504 Chapter 11 Advanced Cluster Analysis of a cluster can take an arbitrarily complicated form. To make probabilistic model-based clusters computationally feasible, we often compromise by assuming that the probability density functions are parameterized distributions. Formally, let o1,...,on be the n observed objects, and 21,...,2k be the parameters of the k distributions, denoted by O = {o1,...,on} and 2 = {21,...,2k}, respectively. Then, for any object, oi ∈O (1 ≤i ≤n), Eq. (11.5) can be rewritten as P(oi|2) = k X j=1 ωjPj(oi|2j), (11.7) where Pj(oi|2j) is the probability that oi is generated from the jth distribution using parameter 2j. Consequently, Eq. (11.6) can be rewritten as P(O|2) = n Y i=1 k X j=1 ωjPj(oi|2j). (11.8) Using the parameterized probability distribution models, the task of probabilistic model-based cluster analysis is to infer a set of parameters, 2, that maximizes Eq. (11.8). Example 11.6 Univariate Gaussian mixture model. Let’s use univariate Gaussian distributions as an example. That is, we assume that the probability density function of each cluster follows a 1-D Gaussian distribution. Suppose there are k clusters. The two parameters for the probability density function of each cluster are center, µj, and standard deviation, σj (1 ≤j ≤k). We denote the parameters as 2j = (µj,σj) and 2 = {21,...,2k}. Let the data set be O = {o1,...,on}, where oi (1 ≤i ≤n) is a real number. For any point, oi ∈O, we have P(oi|2j) = 1 √ 2πσj e− (oi−µj)2 2σ2 . (11.9) Assuming that each cluster has the same probability, that is ω1 = ω2 = ··· = ωk = 1 k, and plugging Eq. (11.9) into Eq. (11.7), we have P(oi|2) = 1 k k X j=1 1 √ 2πσj e− (oi−µj)2 2σ2 . (11.10) Applying Eq. (11.8), we have P(O|2) = 1 k n Y i=1 k X j=1 1 √ 2πσj e− (oi−µj)2 2σ2 . (11.11) The task of probabilistic model-based cluster analysis using a univariate Gaussian mixture model is to infer 2 such that Eq. (11.11) is maximized. 11.1 Probabilistic Model-Based Clustering 505 11.1.3 Expectation-Maximization Algorithm “How can we compute fuzzy clusterings and probabilistic model-based clusterings?” In this section, we introduce a principled approach. Let’s start with a review of the k-means clustering problem and the k-means algorithm studied in Chapter 10. It can easily be shown that k-means clustering is a special case of fuzzy clustering (Exercise 11.1). The k-means algorithm iterates until the clustering cannot be improved. Each iteration consists of two steps: The expectation step (E-step): Given the current cluster centers, each object is assigned to the cluster with a center that is closest to the object. Here, an object is expected to belong to the closest cluster. The maximization step (M-step): Given the cluster assignment, for each cluster, the algorithm adjusts the center so that the sum of the distances from the objects assigned to this cluster and the new center is minimized. That is, the similarity of objects assigned to a cluster is maximized. We can generalize this two-step method to tackle fuzzy clustering and probabilistic model-based clustering. In general, an expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm is a framework that approaches maximum likelihood or maximum a posteriori estimates of parameters in statistical models. In the context of fuzzy or probabilistic model-based clustering, an EM algorithm starts with an initial set of parameters and iterates until the clustering cannot be improved, that is, until the clustering converges or the change is sufﬁciently small (less than a preset threshold). Each iteration also consists of two steps: The expectation step assigns objects to clusters according to the current fuzzy clustering or parameters of probabilistic clusters. The maximization step ﬁnds the new clustering or parameters that maximize the SSE in fuzzy clustering (Eq. 11.4) or the expected likelihood in probabilistic model-based clustering. Example 11.7 Fuzzy clustering using the EM algorithm. Consider the six points in Figure 11.2, where the coordinates of the points are also shown. Let’s compute two fuzzy clusters using the EM algorithm. We randomly select two points, say c1 = a and c2 = b, as the initial centers of the two clusters. The ﬁrst iteration conducts the expectation step and the maximization step as follows. In the E-step, for each point we calculate its membership degree in each cluster. For any point, o, we assign o to c1 and c2 with membership weights 1 dist(o,c1)2 1 dist(o,c1)2 + 1 dist(o,c2)2 = dist(o,c2)2 dist(o,c1)2 + dist(o,c2)2