of frequent patterns is useful for explaining the meaning of patterns. Mei, Xin, Cheng, et al. [MXC+07] studied methods for semantic annotation of frequent patterns. An important extension to frequent itemset mining is mining sequence and struc- tural data. This includes mining sequential patterns (Agrawal and Srikant [AS95]; Pei, Han, Mortazavi-Asl, et al. [PHM-A+01, PHM-A+04]; and Zaki [Zak01]); min- ing frequent espisodes (Mannila, Toivonen, and Verkamo [MTV97]); mining structural 7.9 Bibliographic Notes 325 patterns (Inokuchi, Washio, and Motoda [IWM98]; Kuramochi and Karypis [KK01]; and Yan and Han [YH02]); mining cyclic association rules ( ¨Ozden, Ramaswamy, and Silberschatz [ORS98]); intertransaction association rule mining (Lu, Han, and Feng [LHF98]); and calendric market basket analysis (Ramaswamy, Mahajan, and Silber- schatz [RMS98]). Mining such patterns is considered an advanced topic and readers are referred to these sources. Pattern mining has been extended to help effective data classiﬁcation and cluster- ing. Pattern-based classiﬁcation (Liu, Hsu, and Ma [LHM98] and Cheng, Yan, Han, and Hsu [CYHH07]) is discussed in Chapter 9. Pattern-based cluster analysis (Agrawal, Gehrke, Gunopulos, and Raghavan [AGGR98] and H. Wang, W. Wang, Yang, and Yu [WWYY02]) is discussed in Chapter 11. Pattern mining also helps many other data analysis and processing tasks such as cube gradient mining and discriminative analysis (Imielinski, Khachiyan, and Abdul- ghani [IKA02]; Dong, Han, Lam, et al. [DHL+04]; Ji, Bailey, and Dong [JBD05]), discriminative pattern-based indexing (Yan, Yu, and Han [YYH05]), and discriminative pattern-based similarity search (Yan, Zhu, Yu, and Han [YZYH06]). Pattern mining has been extended to mining spatial, temporal, time-series, and multimedia data, and data streams. Mining spatial association rules or spatial collo- cation rules was studied by Koperski and Han [KH95]; Xiong, Shekhar, Huang, et al. [XSH+04]; and Cao, Mamoulis, and Cheung [CMC05]. Pattern-based mining of time- series data is discussed in Shieh and Keogh [SK08] and Ye and Keogh [YK09]. There are many studies on pattern-based mining of multimedia data such as Za¨ıane, Han, and Zhu [ZHZ00] and Yuan, Wu, and Yang [YWY07]. Methods for mining frequent pat- terns on stream data have been proposed by many researchers, including Manku and Motwani [MM02]; Karp, Papadimitriou, and Shenker [KPS03]; and Metwally, Agrawal, and El Abbadi [MAE05]. These pattern mining methods are considered advanced topics. Pattern mining has broad applications. Application areas include computer science such as software bug analysis, sensor network mining, and performance improvement of operating systems. For example, CP-Miner by Li, Lu, Myagmar, and Zhou [LLMZ04] uses pattern mining to identify copy-pasted code for bug isolation. PR-Miner by Li and Zhou [LZ05] uses pattern mining to extract application-speciﬁc programming rules from source code. Discriminative pattern mining is used for program failure detection to classify software behaviors (Lo, Cheng, Han, et al. [LCH+09]) and for troubleshooting in sensor networks (Khan, Le, Ahmadi, et al. [KLA+08]). This page intentionally left blank 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts Classiﬁcation is a form of data analysis that extracts models describing important data classes. Such models, called classiﬁers, predict categorical (discrete, unordered) class labels. For example, we can build a classiﬁcation model to categorize bank loan applications as either safe or risky. Such analysis can help provide us with a better understanding of the data at large. Many classiﬁcation methods have been proposed by researchers in machine learn- ing, pattern recognition, and statistics. Most algorithms are memory resident, typically assuming a small data size. Recent data mining research has built on such work, develop- ing scalable classiﬁcation and prediction techniques capable of handling large amounts of disk-resident data. Classiﬁcation has numerous applications, including fraud detection, target marketing, performance prediction, manufacturing, and medical diagnosis. We start off by introducing the main ideas of classiﬁcation in Section 8.1. In the rest of this chapter, you will learn the basic techniques for data classiﬁcation such as how to build decision tree classiﬁers (Section 8.2), Bayesian classiﬁers (Section 8.3), and rule-based classiﬁers (Section 8.4). Section 8.5 discusses how to evaluate and compare different classiﬁers. Various measures of accuracy are given as well as techniques for obtaining reliable accuracy estimates. Methods for increasing classiﬁer accuracy are pre- sented in Section 8.6, including cases for when the data set is class imbalanced (i.e., where the main class of interest is rare). 8.1 Basic Concepts We introduce the concept of classiﬁcation in Section 8.1.1. Section 8.1.2 describes the general approach to classiﬁcation as a two-step process. In the ﬁrst step, we build a clas- siﬁcation model based on previous data. In the second step, we determine if the model’s accuracy is acceptable, and if so, we use the model to classify new data. 8.1.1 What Is Classiﬁcation? A bank loans ofﬁcer needs analysis of her data to learn which loan applicants are “safe” and which are “risky” for the bank. A marketing manager at AllElectronics needs data c⃝2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques 327 328 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts analysis to help guess whether a customer with a given proﬁle will buy a new computer. A medical researcher wants to analyze breast cancer data to predict which one of three speciﬁc treatments a patient should receive. In each of these examples, the data analysis task is classiﬁcation, where a model or classiﬁer is constructed to predict class (categor- ical) labels, such as “safe” or “risky” for the loan application data; “yes” or “no” for the marketing data; or “treatment A,” “treatment B,” or “treatment C” for the medical data. These categories can be represented by discrete values, where the ordering among values has no meaning. For example, the values 1, 2, and 3 may be used to represent treatments A, B, and C, where there is no ordering implied among this group of treatment regimes. Suppose that the marketing manager wants to predict how much a given customer will spend during a sale at AllElectronics. This data analysis task is an example of numeric prediction, where the model constructed predicts a continuous-valued function, or ordered value, as opposed to a class label. This model is a predictor. Regression analysis is a statistical methodology that is most often used for numeric prediction; hence the two terms tend to be used synonymously, although other methods for numeric predic- tion exist. Classiﬁcation and numeric prediction are the two major types of prediction problems. This chapter focuses on classiﬁcation. 8.1.2 General Approach to Classiﬁcation “How does classiﬁcation work?” Data classiﬁcation is a two-step process, consisting of a learning step (where a classiﬁcation model is constructed) and a classiﬁcation step (where the model is used to predict class labels for given data). The process is shown for the loan application data of Figure 8.1. (The data are simpliﬁed for illustrative purposes. In reality, we may expect many more attributes to be considered. In the ﬁrst step, a classiﬁer is built describing a predetermined set of data classes or concepts. This is the learning step (or training phase), where a classiﬁcation algorithm builds the classiﬁer by analyzing or “learning from” a training set made up of database tuples and their associated class labels. A tuple, X, is represented by an n-dimensional attribute vector, X = (x1, x2,..., xn), depicting n measurements made on the tuple from n database attributes, respectively, A1, A2,..., An.1 Each tuple, X, is assumed to belong to a predeﬁned class as determined by another database attribute called the class label attribute. The class label attribute is discrete-valued and unordered. It is categor- ical (or nominal) in that each value serves as a category or class. The individual tuples making up the training set are referred to as training tuples and are randomly sam- pled from the database under analysis. In the context of classiﬁcation, data tuples can be referred to as samples, examples, instances, data points, or objects.2 1Each attribute represents a “feature” of X. Hence, the pattern recognition literature uses the term fea- ture vector rather than attribute vector. In our discussion, we use the term attribute vector, and in our notation, any variable representing a vector is shown in bold italic font; measurements depicting the vector are shown in italic font (e.g., X = (x1, x2, x3)). 2In the machine learning literature, training tuples are commonly referred to as training samples. Throughout this text, we prefer to use the term tuples instead of samples. 8.1 Basic Concepts 329 (a) (b) name loan_decision age income Training data Classification algorithm Classification rules ... IF age youth THEN loan_decision risky IF income high THEN loan_decision safe IF age middle_aged AND income low THEN loan_decision risky Sandy Jones Bill Lee Caroline Fox Rick Field Susan Lake Claire Phips Joe Smith ... youth youth middle_aged middle_aged senior senior middle_aged ... low low high low low medium high ... risky risky safe risky safe safe safe ... Classification rules (John Henry, middle_aged, low) Loan decision? risky Test data New data Juan Bello Sylvia Crest Anne Yee ... senior middle_aged middle_aged ... low low high ... name age income loan_decision safe risky safe ... Figure 8.1 The data classiﬁcation process: (a) Learning: Training data are analyzed by a classiﬁcation algorithm. Here, the class label attribute is loan decision, and the learned model or classiﬁer is represented in the form of classiﬁcation rules. (b) Classiﬁcation: Test data are used to estimate the accuracy of the classiﬁcation rules. If the accuracy is considered acceptable, the rules can be applied to the classiﬁcation of new data tuples. 330 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts Because the class label of each training tuple is provided, this step is also known as supervised learning (i.e., the learning of the classiﬁer is “supervised” in that it is told to which class each training tuple belongs). It contrasts with unsupervised learning (or clustering), in which the class label of each training tuple is not known, and the number or set of classes to be learned may not be known in advance. For example, if we did not have the loan decision data available for the training set, we could use clustering to try to determine “groups of like tuples,” which may correspond to risk groups within the loan application data. Clustering is the topic of Chapters 10 and 11. This ﬁrst step of the classiﬁcation process can also be viewed as the learning of a map- ping or function, y = f (X), that can predict the associated class label y of a given tuple X. In this view, we wish to learn a mapping or function that separates the data classes. Typ- ically, this mapping is represented in the form of classiﬁcation rules, decision trees, or mathematical formulae. In our example, the mapping is represented as classiﬁcation rules that identify loan applications as being either safe or risky (Figure 8.1a). The rules can be used to categorize future data tuples, as well as provide deeper insight into the data contents. They also provide a compressed data representation. “What about classiﬁcation accuracy?” In the second step (Figure 8.1b), the model is used for classiﬁcation. First, the predictive accuracy of the classiﬁer is estimated. If we were to use the training set to measure the classiﬁer’s accuracy, this estimate would likely be optimistic, because the classiﬁer tends to overﬁt the data (i.e., during learning it may incorporate some particular anomalies of the training data that are not present in the general data set overall). Therefore, a test set is used, made up of test tuples and their associated class labels. They are independent of the training tuples, meaning that they were not used to construct the classiﬁer. The accuracy of a classiﬁer on a given test set is the percentage of test set tuples that are correctly classiﬁed by the classiﬁer. The associated class label of each test tuple is com- pared with the learned classiﬁer’s class prediction for that tuple. Section 8.5 describes several methods for estimating classiﬁer accuracy. If the accuracy of the classiﬁer is con- sidered acceptable, the classiﬁer can be used to classify future data tuples for which the class label is not known. (Such data are also referred to in the machine learning liter- ature as “unknown” or “previously unseen” data.) For example, the classiﬁcation rules learned in Figure 8.1(a) from the analysis of data from previous loan applications can be used to approve or reject new or future loan applicants. 8.2 Decision Tree Induction Decision tree induction is the learning of decision trees from class-labeled training tuples. A decision tree is a ﬂowchart-like tree structure, where each internal node (non- leaf node) denotes a test on an attribute, each branch represents an outcome of the test, and each leaf node (or terminal node) holds a class label. The topmost node in a tree is the root node. A typical decision tree is shown in Figure 8.2. It represents the concept buys computer, that is, it predicts whether a customer at AllElectronics is 8.2 Decision Tree Induction 331 age? youth senior student? yes yes credit_rating? no yes no yes no fair excellent middle_aged Figure 8.2 A decision tree for the concept buys computer, indicating whether an AllElectronics cus- tomer is likely to purchase a computer. Each internal (nonleaf) node represents a test on an attribute. Each leaf node represents a class (either buys computer = yes or buys computer = no). likely to purchase a computer. Internal nodes are denoted by rectangles, and leaf nodes are denoted by ovals. Some decision tree algorithms produce only binary trees (where each internal node branches to exactly two other nodes), whereas others can produce nonbinary trees. “How are decision trees used for classiﬁcation?” Given a tuple, X, for which the asso- ciated class label is unknown, the attribute values of the tuple are tested against the decision tree. A path is traced from the root to a leaf node, which holds the class prediction for that tuple. Decision trees can easily be converted to classiﬁcation rules. “Why are decision tree classiﬁers so popular?” The construction of decision tree clas- siﬁers does not require any domain knowledge or parameter setting, and therefore is appropriate for exploratory knowledge discovery. Decision trees can handle multidi- mensional data. Their representation of acquired knowledge in tree form is intuitive and generally easy to assimilate by humans. The learning and classiﬁcation steps of decision tree induction are simple and fast. In general, decision tree classiﬁers have good accu- racy. However, successful use may depend on the data at hand. Decision tree induction algorithms have been used for classiﬁcation in many application areas such as medicine, manufacturing and production, ﬁnancial analysis, astronomy, and molecular biology. Decision trees are the basis of several commercial rule induction systems. In Section 8.2.1, we describe a basic algorithm for learning decision trees. During tree construction, attribute selection measures are used to select the attribute that best partitions the tuples into distinct classes. Popular measures of attribute selection are given in Section 8.2.2. When decision trees are built, many of the branches may reﬂect noise or outliers in the training data. Tree pruning attempts to identify and remove such branches, with the goal of improving classiﬁcation accuracy on unseen data. Tree prun- ing is described in Section 8.2.3. Scalability issues for the induction of decision trees 332 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts from large databases are discussed in Section 8.2.4. Section 8.2.5 presents a visual mining approach to decision tree induction. 8.2.1 Decision Tree Induction During the late 1970s and early 1980s, J. Ross Quinlan, a researcher in machine learning, developed a decision tree algorithm known as ID3 (Iterative Dichotomiser). This work expanded on earlier work on concept learning systems, described by E. B. Hunt, J. Marin, and P. T. Stone. Quinlan later presented C4.5 (a successor of ID3), which became a benchmark to which newer supervised learning algorithms are often compared. In 1984, a group of statisticians (L. Breiman, J. Friedman, R. Olshen, and C. Stone) published the book Classiﬁcation and Regression Trees (CART), which described the generation of binary decision trees. ID3 and CART were invented independently of one another at around the same time, yet follow a similar approach for learning decision trees from training tuples. These two cornerstone algorithms spawned a ﬂurry of work on decision tree induction. ID3, C4.5, and CART adopt a greedy (i.e., nonbacktracking) approach in which deci- sion trees are constructed in a top-down recursive divide-and-conquer manner. Most algorithms for decision tree induction also follow a top-down approach, which starts with a training set of tuples and their associated class labels. The training set is recur- sively partitioned into smaller subsets as the tree is being built. A basic decision tree algorithm is summarized in Figure 8.3. At ﬁrst glance, the algorithm may appear long, but fear not! It is quite straightforward. The strategy is as follows. The algorithm is called with three parameters: D, attribute list, and Attribute selection method. We refer to D as a data partition. Initially, it is the complete set of training tuples and their associated class labels. The parameter attribute list is a list of attributes describing the tuples. Attribute selection method speciﬁes a heuris- tic procedure for selecting the attribute that “best” discriminates the given tuples according to class. This procedure employs an attribute selection measure such as information gain or the Gini index. Whether the tree is strictly binary is generally driven by the attribute selection measure. Some attribute selection measures, such as the Gini index, enforce the resulting tree to be binary. Others, like information gain, do not, therein allowing multiway splits (i.e., two or more branches to be grown from a node). The tree starts as a single node, N, representing the training tuples in D (step 1).3 3The partition of class-labeled training tuples at node N is the set of tuples that follow a path from the root of the tree to node N when being processed by the tree. This set is sometimes referred to in the literature as the family of tuples at node N. We have referred to this set as the “tuples represented at node N,” “the tuples that reach node N,” or simply “the tuples at node N.” Rather than storing the actual tuples at a node, most implementations store pointers to these tuples. 8.2 Decision Tree Induction 333 Algorithm: Generate decision tree. Generate a decision tree from the training tuples of data partition, D. Input: Data partition, D, which is a set of training tuples and their associated class labels; attribute list, the set of candidate attributes; Attribute selection method, a procedure to determine the splitting criterion that “best” partitions the data tuples into individual classes. This criterion consists of a splitting attribute and, possibly, either a split-point or splitting subset. Output: A decision tree. Method: (1) create a node N; (2) if tuples in D are all of the same class, C, then (3) return N as a leaf node labeled with the class C; (4) if attribute list is empty then (5) return N as a leaf node labeled with the majority class in D; // majority voting (6) apply Attribute selection method(D, attribute list) to ﬁnd the “best” splitting criterion; (7) label node N with splitting criterion; (8) if splitting attribute is discrete-valued and multiway splits allowed then // not restricted to binary trees (9) attribute list ←attribute list −splitting attribute; // remove splitting attribute (10) for each outcome j of splitting criterion // partition the tuples and grow subtrees for each partition (11) let Dj be the set of data tuples in D satisfying outcome j; // a partition (12) if Dj is empty then (13) attach a leaf labeled with the majority class in D to node N; (14) else attach the node returned by Generate decision tree(Dj, attribute list) to node N; endfor (15) return N; Figure 8.3 Basic algorithm for inducing a decision tree from training tuples. If the tuples in D are all of the same class, then node N becomes a leaf and is labeled with that class (steps 2 and 3). Note that steps 4 and 5 are terminating conditions. All terminating conditions are explained at the end of the algorithm. Otherwise, the algorithm calls Attribute selection method to determine the splitting criterion. The splitting criterion tells us which attribute to test at node N by deter- mining the “best” way to separate or partition the tuples in D into individual classes (step 6). The splitting criterion also tells us which branches to grow from node N with respect to the outcomes of the chosen test. More speciﬁcally, the splitting cri- terion indicates the splitting attribute and may also indicate either a split-point or a splitting subset. The splitting criterion is determined so that, ideally, the resulting 334 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts partitions at each branch are as “pure” as possible. A partition is pure if all the tuples in it belong to the same class. In other words, if we split up the tuples in D according to the mutually exclusive outcomes of the splitting criterion, we hope for the resulting partitions to be as pure as possible. The node N is labeled with the splitting criterion, which serves as a test at the node (step 7). A branch is grown from node N for each of the outcomes of the splitting criterion. The tuples in D are partitioned accordingly (steps 10 to 11). There are three possible scenarios, as illustrated in Figure 8.4. Let A be the splitting attribute. A has v distinct values, {a1, a2,..., av}, based on the training data. 1. A is discrete-valued: In this case, the outcomes of the test at node N correspond directly to the known values of A. A branch is created for each known value, aj, of A and labeled with that value (Figure 8.4a). Partition Dj is the subset of class-labeled tuples in D having value aj of A. Because all the tuples in a Partitioning scenarios Examples color? income? income? red green orange purple high low blue medium A? A? yes no yes (a) (b) (c) no A  SA? color  {red, green}? a1 av A split_ point 42,000  42,000 A split_ point a2 ... Figure 8.4 This ﬁgure shows three possibilities for partitioning tuples based on the splitting criterion, each with examples. Let A be the splitting attribute. (a) If A is discrete-valued, then one branch is grown for each known value of A. (b) If A is continuous-valued, then two branches are grown, corresponding to A ≤split point and A > split point. (c) If A is discrete-valued and a binary tree must be produced, then the test is of the form A ∈SA, where SA is the splitting subset for A. 8.2 Decision Tree Induction 335 given partition have the same value for A, A need not be considered in any future partitioning of the tuples. Therefore, it is removed from attribute list (steps 8 and 9). 2. A is continuous-valued: In this case, the test at node N has two possible outcomes, corresponding to the conditions A ≤split point and A > split point, respectively, where split point is the split-point returned by Attribute selection method as part of the splitting criterion. (In practice, the split-point, a, is often taken as the midpoint of two known adjacent values of A and therefore may not actually be a preexisting value of A from the training data.) Two branches are grown from N and labeled according to the previous outcomes (Figure 8.4b). The tuples are partitioned such that D1 holds the subset of class-labeled tuples in D for which A ≤split point, while D2 holds the rest. 3. A is discrete-valued and a binary tree must be produced (as dictated by the attribute selection measure or algorithm being used): The test at node N is of the form “A ∈ SA?,” where SA is the splitting subset for A, returned by Attribute selection method as part of the splitting criterion. It is a subset of the known values of A. If a given tuple has value aj of A and if aj ∈SA, then the test at node N is satisﬁed. Two branches are grown from N (Figure 8.4c). By convention, the left branch out of N is labeled yes so that D1 corresponds to the subset of class-labeled tuples in D that satisfy the test. The right branch out of N is labeled no so that D2 corresponds to the subset of class-labeled tuples from D that do not satisfy the test. The algorithm uses the same process recursively to form a decision tree for the tuples at each resulting partition, Dj, of D (step 14). The recursive partitioning stops only when any one of the following terminating conditions is true: 1. All the tuples in partition D (represented at node N) belong to the same class (steps 2 and 3). 2. There are no remaining attributes on which the tuples may be further partitioned (step 4). In this case, majority voting is employed (step 5). This involves con- verting node N into a leaf and labeling it with the most common class in D. Alternatively, the class distribution of the node tuples may be stored. 3. There are no tuples for a given branch, that is, a partition Dj is empty (step 12). In this case, a leaf is created with the majority class in D (step 13). The resulting decision tree is returned (step 15). The computational complexity of the algorithm given training set D is O(n × |D| × log(|D|)), where n is the number of attributes describing the tuples in D and |D| is the number of training tuples in D. This means that the computational cost of growing a tree grows at most n × |D| × log(|D|) with |D| tuples. The proof is left as an exercise for the reader. 336 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts Incremental versions of decision tree induction have also been proposed. When given new training data, these restructure the decision tree acquired from learning on previous training data, rather than relearning a new tree from scratch. Differences in decision tree algorithms include how the attributes are selected in creating the tree (Section 8.2.2) and the mechanisms used for pruning (Section 8.2.3). The basic algorithm described earlier requires one pass over the training tuples in D for each level of the tree. This can lead to long training times and lack of available memory when dealing with large databases. Improvements regarding the scalability of decision tree induction are discussed in Section 8.2.4. Section 8.2.5 presents a visual interactive approach to decision tree construction. A discussion of strategies for extracting rules from decision trees is given in Section 8.4.2 regarding rule-based classiﬁcation. 8.2.2 Attribute Selection Measures An attribute selection measure is a heuristic for selecting the splitting criterion that “best” separates a given data partition, D, of class-labeled training tuples into individual classes. If we were to split D into smaller partitions according to the outcomes of the splitting criterion, ideally each partition would be pure (i.e., all the tuples that fall into a given partition would belong to the same class). Conceptually, the “best” splitting crite- rion is the one that most closely results in such a scenario. Attribute selection measures are also known as splitting rules because they determine how the tuples at a given node are to be split. The attribute selection measure provides a ranking for each attribute describing the given training tuples. The attribute having the best score for the measure4 is chosen as the splitting attribute for the given tuples. If the splitting attribute is continuous-valued or if we are restricted to binary trees, then, respectively, either a split point or a splitting subset must also be determined as part of the splitting criterion. The tree node created for partition D is labeled with the splitting criterion, branches are grown for each out- come of the criterion, and the tuples are partitioned accordingly. This section describes three popular attribute selection measures—information gain, gain ratio, and Gini index. The notation used herein is as follows. Let D, the data partition, be a training set of class-labeled tuples. Suppose the class label attribute has m distinct values deﬁning m distinct classes, Ci (for i = 1,..., m). Let Ci,D be the set of tuples of class Ci in D. Let |D| and |Ci,D| denote the number of tuples in D and Ci,D, respectively. Information Gain ID3 uses information gain as its attribute selection measure. This measure is based on pioneering work by Claude Shannon on information theory, which studied the value or “information content” of messages. Let node N represent or hold the tuples of partition D. The attribute with the highest information gain is chosen as the splitting attribute for node N. This attribute minimizes the information needed to classify the tuples in the 4Depending on the measure, either the highest or lowest score is chosen as the best (i.e., some measures strive to maximize while others strive to minimize). 8.2 Decision Tree Induction 337 resulting partitions and reﬂects the least randomness or “impurity” in these parti- tions. Such an approach minimizes the expected number of tests needed to classify a given tuple and guarantees that a simple (but not necessarily the simplest) tree is found. The expected information needed to classify a tuple in D is given by Info(D) = − m X i=1 pi log2(pi), (8.1) where pi is the nonzero probability that an arbitrary tuple in D belongs to class Ci and is estimated by |Ci,D|/|D|. A log function to the base 2 is used, because the information is encoded in bits. Info(D) is just the average amount of information needed to identify the class label of a tuple in D. Note that, at this point, the information we have is based solely on the proportions of tuples of each class. Info(D) is also known as the entropy of D. Now, suppose we were to partition the tuples in D on some attribute A having v dis- tinct values, {a1, a2,..., av}, as observed from the training data. If A is discrete-valued, these values correspond directly to the v outcomes of a test on A. Attribute A can be used to split D into v partitions or subsets, {D1, D2,..., Dv}, where Dj contains those tuples in D that have outcome aj of A. These partitions would correspond to the branches grown from node N. Ideally, we would like this partitioning to produce an exact classiﬁcation of the tuples. That is, we would like for each partition to be pure. However, it is quite likely that the partitions will be impure (e.g., where a partition may contain a collection of tuples from different classes rather than from a single class). How much more information would we still need (after the partitioning) to arrive at an exact classiﬁcation? This amount is measured by InfoA(D) = v X j=1 |Dj| |D| × Info(Dj). (8.2) The term |Dj| |D| acts as the weight of the jth partition. InfoA(D) is the expected informa- tion required to classify a tuple from D based on the partitioning by A. The smaller the expected information (still) required, the greater the purity of the partitions. Information gain is deﬁned as the difference between the original information requirement (i.e., based on just the proportion of classes) and the new requirement (i.e., obtained after partitioning on A). That is, Gain(A) = Info(D) −InfoA(D). (8.3) In other words, Gain(A) tells us how much would be gained by branching on A. It is the expected reduction in the information requirement caused by knowing the value of A. The attribute A with the highest information gain, Gain(A), is chosen as the splitting attribute at node N. This is equivalent to saying that we want to partition on the attribute A that would do the “best classiﬁcation,” so that the amount of information still required to ﬁnish classifying the tuples is minimal (i.e., minimum InfoA(D)). 338 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts Table 8.1 Class-Labeled Training Tuples from the AllElectronics Customer Database RID age income student credit rating Class: buys computer 1 youth high no fair no 2 youth high no excellent no 3 middle aged high no fair yes 4 senior medium no fair yes 5 senior low yes fair yes 6 senior low yes excellent no 7 middle aged low yes excellent yes 8 youth medium no fair no 9 youth low yes fair yes 10 senior medium yes fair yes 11 youth medium yes excellent yes 12 middle aged medium no excellent yes 13 middle aged high yes fair yes 14 senior medium no excellent no Example 8.1 Induction of a decision tree using information gain. Table 8.1 presents a training set, D, of class-labeled tuples randomly selected from the AllElectronics customer database. (The data are adapted from Quinlan [Qui86]. In this example, each attribute is discrete- valued. Continuous-valued attributes have been generalized.) The class label attribute, buys computer, has two distinct values (namely, {yes, no}); therefore, there are two dis- tinct classes (i.e., m = 2). Let class C1 correspond to yes and class C2 correspond to no. There are nine tuples of class yes and ﬁve tuples of class no. A (root) node N is created for the tuples in D. To ﬁnd the splitting criterion for these tuples, we must compute the information gain of each attribute. We ﬁrst use Eq. (8.1) to compute the expected information needed to classify a tuple in D: Info(D) = −9 14 log2  9 14  −5 14 log2  5 14  = 0.940 bits. Next, we need to compute the expected information requirement for each attribute. Let’s start with the attribute age. We need to look at the distribution of yes and no tuples for each category of age. For the age category “youth,” there are two yes tuples and three no tuples. For the category “middle aged,” there are four yes tuples and zero no tuples. For the category “senior,” there are three yes tuples and two no tuples. Using Eq. (8.2), the expected information needed to classify a tuple in D if the tuples are partitioned according to age is Infoage(D) = 5 14 ×  −2 5 log2 2 5 −3 5 log2 3 5  8.2 Decision Tree Induction 339 + 4 14 ×  −4 4 log2 4 4  + 5 14 ×  −3 5 log2 3 5 −2 5 log2 2 5  = 0.694 bits. Hence, the gain in information from such a partitioning would be Gain(age) = Info(D) −Infoage(D) = 0.940 −0.694 = 0.246 bits. Similarly, we can compute Gain(income) = 0.029 bits, Gain(student) = 0.151 bits, and Gain(credit rating) = 0.048 bits. Because age has the highest information gain among the attributes, it is selected as the splitting attribute. Node N is labeled with age, and branches are grown for each of the attribute’s values. The tuples are then partitioned accordingly, as shown in Figure 8.5. Notice that the tuples falling into the partition for age = middle aged all belong to the same class. Because they all belong to class “yes,” a leaf should therefore be created at the end of this branch and labeled “yes.” The ﬁnal decision tree returned by the algorithm was shown earlier in Figure 8.2. Figure 8.5 The attribute age has the highest information gain and therefore becomes the splitting attribute at the root node of the decision tree. Branches are grown for each outcome of age. The tuples are shown partitioned accordingly. 340 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts “But how can we compute the information gain of an attribute that is continuous- valued, unlike in the example?” Suppose, instead, that we have an attribute A that is continuous-valued, rather than discrete-valued. (For example, suppose that instead of the discretized version of age from the example, we have the raw values for this attribute.) For such a scenario, we must determine the “best” split-point for A, where the split-point is a threshold on A. We ﬁrst sort the values of A in increasing order. Typically, the midpoint between each pair of adjacent values is considered as a possible split-point. Therefore, given v values of A, then v −1 possible splits are evaluated. For example, the midpoint between the values ai and ai+1 of A is ai + ai+1 2 . (8.4) If the values of A are sorted in advance, then determining the best split for A requires only one pass through the values. For each possible split-point for A, we evaluate InfoA(D), where the number of partitions is two, that is, v = 2 (or j = 1,2) in Eq. (8.2). The point with the minimum expected information requirement for A is selected as the split point for A. D1 is the set of tuples in D satisfying A ≤split point, and D2 is the set of tuples in D satisfying A > split point. Gain Ratio The information gain measure is biased toward tests with many outcomes. That is, it prefers to select attributes having a large number of values. For example, consider an attribute that acts as a unique identiﬁer such as product ID. A split on product ID would result in a large number of partitions (as many as there are values), each one containing just one tuple. Because each partition is pure, the information required to classify data set D based on this partitioning would be Infoproduct ID(D) = 0. Therefore, the informa- tion gained by partitioning on this attribute is maximal. Clearly, such a partitioning is useless for classiﬁcation. C4.5, a successor of ID3, uses an extension to information gain known as gain ratio, which attempts to overcome this bias. It applies a kind of normalization to information gain using a “split information” value deﬁned analogously with Info(D) as SplitInfoA(D) = − v X j=1 |Dj| |D| × log2 |Dj| |D|  . (8.5) This value represents the potential information generated by splitting the training data set, D, into v partitions, corresponding to the v outcomes of a test on attribute A. Note that, for each outcome, it considers the number of tuples having that outcome with respect to the total number of tuples in D. It differs from information gain, which measures the information with respect to classiﬁcation that is acquired based on the 8.2 Decision Tree Induction 341 same partitioning. The gain ratio is deﬁned as GainRatio(A) = Gain(A) SplitInfoA(D). (8.6) The attribute with the maximum gain ratio is selected as the splitting attribute. Note, however, that as the split information approaches 0, the ratio becomes unstable. A con- straint is added to avoid this, whereby the information gain of the test selected must be large—at least as great as the average gain over all tests examined. Example 8.2 Computation of gain ratio for the attribute income. A test on income splits the data of Table 8.1 into three partitions, namely low, medium, and high, containing four, six, and four tuples, respectively. To compute the gain ratio of income, we ﬁrst use Eq. (8.5) to obtain SplitInfoincome(D) = −4 14 × log2  4 14  −6 14 × log2  6 14  −4 14 × log2  4 14  = 1.557. From Example 8.1, we have Gain(income) = 0.029. Therefore, GainRatio(income) = 0.029/1.557 = 0.019. Gini Index The Gini index is used in CART. Using the notation previously described, the Gini index measures the impurity of D, a data partition or set of training tuples, as Gini(D) = 1 − m X i=1 p2 i , (8.7) where pi is the probability that a tuple in D belongs to class Ci and is estimated by |Ci,D|/|D|. The sum is computed over m classes. The Gini index considers a binary split for each attribute. Let’s ﬁrst consider the case where A is a discrete-valued attribute having v distinct values, {a1, a2,..., av}, occur- ring in D. To determine the best binary split on A, we examine all the possible subsets that can be formed using known values of A. Each subset, SA, can be considered as a binary test for attribute A of the form “A ∈SA?” Given a tuple, this test is satisﬁed if the value of A for the tuple is among the values listed in SA. If A has v possible val- ues, then there are 2v possible subsets. For example, if income has three possible values, namely {low, medium, high}, then the possible subsets are {low, medium, high}, {low, medium}, {low, high}, {medium, high}, {low}, {medium}, {high}, and {}. We exclude the power set, {low, medium, high}, and the empty set from consideration since, conceptu- ally, they do not represent a split. Therefore, there are 2v −2 possible ways to form two partitions of the data, D, based on a binary split on A. 342 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts When considering a binary split, we compute a weighted sum of the impurity of each resulting partition. For example, if a binary split on A partitions D into D1 and D2, the Gini index of D given that partitioning is GiniA(D) = |D1| |D| Gini(D1) + |D2| |D| Gini(D2). (8.8) For each attribute, each of the possible binary splits is considered. For a discrete-valued attribute, the subset that gives the minimum Gini index for that attribute is selected as its splitting subset. For continuous-valued attributes, each possible split-point must be considered. The strategy is similar to that described earlier for information gain, where the midpoint between each pair of (sorted) adjacent values is taken as a possible split-point. The point giving the minimum Gini index for a given (continuous-valued) attribute is taken as the split-point of that attribute. Recall that for a possible split-point of A, D1 is the set of tuples in D satisfying A ≤split point, and D2 is the set of tuples in D satisfying A > split point. The reduction in impurity that would be incurred by a binary split on a discrete- or continuous-valued attribute A is 1Gini(A) = Gini(D) −GiniA(D). (8.9) The attribute that maximizes the reduction in impurity (or, equivalently, has the minimum Gini index) is selected as the splitting attribute. This attribute and either its splitting subset (for a discrete-valued splitting attribute) or split-point (for a continuous-valued splitting attribute) together form the splitting criterion. Example 8.3 Induction of a decision tree using the Gini index. Let D be the training data shown earlier in Table 8.1, where there are nine tuples belonging to the class buys computer = yes and the remaining ﬁve tuples belong to the class buys computer = no. A (root) node N is created for the tuples in D. We ﬁrst use Eq. (8.7) for the Gini index to compute the impurity of D: Gini(D) = 1 −  9 14 2 −  5 14 2 = 0.459. To ﬁnd the splitting criterion for the tuples in D, we need to compute the Gini index for each attribute. Let’s start with the attribute income and consider each of the possible splitting subsets. Consider the subset {low, medium}. This would result in 10 tuples in partition D1 satisfying the condition “income ∈{low, medium}.” The remaining four tuples of D would be assigned to partition D2. The Gini index value computed based on 8.2 Decision Tree Induction 343 this partitioning is Giniincome ∈{low,medium}(D) = 10 14Gini(D1) + 4 14Gini(D2) = 10 14 1 −  7 10 2 −  3 10 2! + 4 14 1 − 2 4 2 − 2 4 2! = 0.443 = Giniincome ∈{high}(D). Similarly, the Gini index values for splits on the remaining subsets are 0.458 (for the sub- sets {low, high} and {medium}) and 0.450 (for the subsets {medium, high} and {low}). Therefore, the best binary split for attribute income is on {low, medium} (or {high}) because it minimizes the Gini index. Evaluating age, we obtain {youth, senior} (or {middle aged}) as the best split for age with a Gini index of 0.375; the attributes student and credit rating are both binary, with Gini index values of 0.367 and 0.429, respectively. The attribute age and splitting subset {youth, senior} therefore give the minimum Gini index overall, with a reduction in impurity of 0.459 −0.357 = 0.102. The binary split “age ∈{youth, senior?}” results in the maximum reduction in impurity of the tuples in D and is returned as the splitting criterion. Node N is labeled with the criterion, two branches are grown from it, and the tuples are partitioned accordingly. Other Attribute Selection Measures This section on attribute selection measures was not intended to be exhaustive. We have shown three measures that are commonly used for building decision trees. These measures are not without their biases. Information gain, as we saw, is biased toward multivalued attributes. Although the gain ratio adjusts for this bias, it tends to prefer unbalanced splits in which one partition is much smaller than the others. The Gini index is biased toward multivalued attributes and has difﬁculty when the number of classes is large. It also tends to favor tests that result in equal-size partitions and purity in both partitions. Although biased, these measures give reasonably good results in practice. Many other attribute selection measures have been proposed. CHAID, a decision tree algorithm that is popular in marketing, uses an attribute selection measure that is based on the statistical χ2 test for independence. Other measures include C-SEP (which per- forms better than information gain and the Gini index in certain cases) and G-statistic (an information theoretic measure that is a close approximation to χ2 distribution). Attribute selection measures based on the Minimum Description Length (MDL) principle have the least bias toward multivalued attributes. MDL-based measures use encoding techniques to deﬁne the “best” decision tree as the one that requires the fewest number of bits to both (1) encode the tree and (2) encode the exceptions to the tree 344 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts (i.e., cases that are not correctly classiﬁed by the tree). Its main idea is that the simplest of solutions is preferred. Other attribute selection measures consider multivariate splits (i.e., where the par- titioning of tuples is based on a combination of attributes, rather than on a single attribute). The CART system, for example, can ﬁnd multivariate splits based on a lin- ear combination of attributes. Multivariate splits are a form of attribute (or feature) construction, where new attributes are created based on the existing ones. (Attribute construction was also discussed in Chapter 3, as a form of data transformation.) These other measures mentioned here are beyond the scope of this book. Additional references are given in the bibliographic notes at the end of this chapter (Section 8.9). “Which attribute selection measure is the best?” All measures have some bias. It has been shown that the time complexity of decision tree induction generally increases exponentially with tree height. Hence, measures that tend to produce shallower trees (e.g., with multiway rather than binary splits, and that favor more balanced splits) may be preferred. However, some studies have found that shallow trees tend to have a large number of leaves and higher error rates. Despite several comparative studies, no one attribute selection measure has been found to be signiﬁcantly superior to others. Most measures give quite good results. 8.2.3 Tree Pruning When a decision tree is built, many of the branches will reﬂect anomalies in the training data due to noise or outliers. Tree pruning methods address this problem of overﬁtting the data. Such methods typically use statistical measures to remove the least-reliable branches. An unpruned tree and a pruned version of it are shown in Figure 8.6. Pruned trees tend to be smaller and less complex and, thus, easier to comprehend. They are usually faster and better at correctly classifying independent test data (i.e., of previously unseen tuples) than unpruned trees. “How does tree pruning work?” There are two common approaches to tree pruning: prepruning and postpruning. In the prepruning approach, a tree is “pruned” by halting its construction early (e.g., by deciding not to further split or partition the subset of training tuples at a given node). Upon halting, the node becomes a leaf. The leaf may hold the most frequent class among the subset tuples or the probability distribution of those tuples. When constructing a tree, measures such as statistical signiﬁcance, information gain, Gini index, and so on, can be used to assess the goodness of a split. If partitioning the tuples at a node would result in a split that falls below a prespeciﬁed threshold, then fur- ther partitioning of the given subset is halted. There are difﬁculties, however, in choosing an appropriate threshold. High thresholds could result in oversimpliﬁed trees, whereas low thresholds could result in very little simpliﬁcation. The second and more common approach is postpruning, which removes subtrees from a “fully grown” tree. A subtree at a given node is pruned by removing its branches and replacing it with a leaf. The leaf is labeled with the most frequent class among the subtree being replaced. For example, notice the subtree at node “A3?” in the unpruned 8.2 Decision Tree Induction 345 A1? A2? A5? A4? A2? A1? A4? A3? class B class B class A class A yes no yes no yes no yes no class B class B class A class A yes no yes no yes no yes no class B class A Figure 8.6 An unpruned decision tree and a pruned version of it. tree of Figure 8.6. Suppose that the most common class within this subtree is “class B.” In the pruned version of the tree, the subtree in question is pruned by replacing it with the leaf “class B.” The cost complexity pruning algorithm used in CART is an example of the postprun- ing approach. This approach considers the cost complexity of a tree to be a function of the number of leaves in the tree and the error rate of the tree (where the error rate is the percentage of tuples misclassiﬁed by the tree). It starts from the bottom of the tree. For each internal node, N, it computes the cost complexity of the subtree at N, and the cost complexity of the subtree at N if it were to be pruned (i.e., replaced by a leaf node). The two values are compared. If pruning the subtree at node N would result in a smaller cost complexity, then the subtree is pruned. Otherwise, it is kept. A pruning set of class-labeled tuples is used to estimate cost complexity. This set is independent of the training set used to build the unpruned tree and of any test set used for accuracy estimation. The algorithm generates a set of progressively pruned trees. In general, the smallest decision tree that minimizes the cost complexity is preferred. C4.5 uses a method called pessimistic pruning, which is similar to the cost complex- ity method in that it also uses error rate estimates to make decisions regarding subtree pruning. Pessimistic pruning, however, does not require the use of a prune set. Instead, it uses the training set to estimate error rates. Recall that an estimate of accuracy or error based on the training set is overly optimistic and, therefore, strongly biased. The pessimistic pruning method therefore adjusts the error rates obtained from the training set by adding a penalty, so as to counter the bias incurred. Rather than pruning trees based on estimated error rates, we can prune trees based on the number of bits required to encode them. The “best” pruned tree is the one that minimizes the number of encoding bits. This method adopts the MDL principle, which was brieﬂy introduced in Section 8.2.2. The basic idea is that the simplest solution is pre- ferred. Unlike cost complexity pruning, it does not require an independent set of tuples. 346 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts Alternatively, prepruning and postpruning may be interleaved for a combined approach. Postpruning requires more computation than prepruning, yet generally leads to a more reliable tree. No single pruning method has been found to be superior over all others. Although some pruning methods do depend on the availability of additional data for pruning, this is usually not a concern when dealing with large databases. Although pruned trees tend to be more compact than their unpruned counterparts, they may still be rather large and complex. Decision trees can suffer from repetition and replication (Figure 8.7), making them overwhelming to interpret. Repetition occurs when an attribute is repeatedly tested along a given branch of the tree (e.g., “age < 60?,” student? yes no yes no excellent fair low med high credit_rating? income? class B class B class A class A classC excellent fair low med high credit_rating? income? class B class A class A class C age  youth? yes no yes no yes no A145? A1 50? A160? … … class B class A (b) (a) Figure 8.7 An example of: (a) subtree repetition, where an attribute is repeatedly tested along a given branch of the tree (e.g., age) and (b) subtree replication, where duplicate subtrees exist within a tree (e.g., the subtree headed by the node “credit rating?”). 8.2 Decision Tree Induction 347 followed by “age < 45?,” and so on). In replication, duplicate subtrees exist within the tree. These situations can impede the accuracy and comprehensibility of a decision tree. The use of multivariate splits (splits based on a combination of attributes) can prevent these problems. Another approach is to use a different form of knowledge representa- tion, such as rules, instead of decision trees. This is described in Section 8.4.2, which shows how a rule-based classiﬁer can be constructed by extracting IF-THEN rules from a decision tree. 8.2.4 Scalability and Decision Tree Induction “What if D, the disk-resident training set of class-labeled tuples, does not ﬁt in memory? In other words, how scalable is decision tree induction?” The efﬁciency of existing decision tree algorithms, such as ID3, C4.5, and CART, has been well established for relatively small data sets. Efﬁciency becomes an issue of concern when these algorithms are applied to the mining of very large real-world databases. The pioneering decision tree algorithms that we have discussed so far have the restriction that the training tuples should reside in memory. In data mining applications, very large training sets of millions of tuples are com- mon. Most often, the training data will not ﬁt in memory! Therefore, decision tree construction becomes inefﬁcient due to swapping of the training tuples in and out of main and cache memories. More scalable approaches, capable of handling train- ing data that are too large to ﬁt in memory, are required. Earlier strategies to “save space” included discretizing continuous-valued attributes and sampling data at each node. These techniques, however, still assume that the training set can ﬁt in memory. Several scalable decision tree induction methods have been introduced in recent stud- ies. RainForest, for example, adapts to the amount of main memory available and applies to any decision tree induction algorithm. The method maintains an AVC-set (where “AVC” stands for “Attribute-Value, Classlabel”) for each attribute, at each tree node, describing the training tuples at the node. The AVC-set of an attribute A at node N gives the class label counts for each value of A for the tuples at N. Figure 8.8 shows AVC- sets for the tuple data of Table 8.1. The set of all AVC-sets at a node N is the AVC-group of N. The size of an AVC-set for attribute A at node N depends only on the number of distinct values of A and the number of classes in the set of tuples at N. Typically, this size should ﬁt in memory, even for real-world data. RainForest also has techniques, how- ever, for handling the case where the AVC-group does not ﬁt in memory. Therefore, the method has high scalability for decision tree induction in very large data sets. BOAT (Bootstrapped Optimistic Algorithm for Tree construction) is a decision tree algorithm that takes a completely different approach to scalability—it is not based on the use of any special data structures. Instead, it uses a statistical technique known as “bootstrapping” (Section 8.5.4) to create several smaller samples (or subsets) of the given training data, each of which ﬁts in memory. Each subset is used to construct a tree, resulting in several trees. The trees are examined and used to construct a new tree, T′, that turns out to be “very close” to the tree that would have been generated if all the original training data had ﬁt in memory. 348 Chapter 8 Classiﬁcation: Basic Concepts age buys_computer buys_computer student buys_computer yes no 2 3 4 0 yes yes no no 6 1 3 4 buys_computer credit_ratting yes fair no excellent 6 2 3 3 3 2 yes income low medium high youth middle_aged senior no 3 1 4 2 2 2 Figure 8.8 The use of data structures to hold aggregate information regarding the training data (e.g., these AVC-sets describing Table