larger data sets than PAM. The effectiveness of CLARA depends on the sample size. Notice that PAM searches for the best k-medoids among a given data set, whereas CLARA searches for the best k-medoids among the selected sample of the data set. CLARA cannot ﬁnd a good clustering if any of the best sampled medoids is far from the best k-medoids. If an object 10.3 Hierarchical Methods 457 Algorithm: k-medoids. PAM, a k-medoids algorithm for partitioning based on medoid or central objects. Input: k: the number of clusters, D: a data set containing n objects. Output: A set of k clusters. Method: (1) arbitrarily choose k objects in D as the initial representative objects or seeds; (2) repeat (3) assign each remaining object to the cluster with the nearest representative object; (4) randomly select a nonrepresentative object, orandom; (5) compute the total cost, S, of swapping representative object, oj, with orandom; (6) if S < 0 then swap oj with orandom to form the new set of k representative objects; (7) until no change; Figure 10.5 PAM, a k-medoids partitioning algorithm. is one of the best k-medoids but is not selected during sampling, CLARA will never ﬁnd the best clustering. (You will be asked to provide an example demonstrating this as an exercise.) “How might we improve the quality and scalability of CLARA?” Recall that when searching for better medoids, PAM examines every object in the data set against every current medoid, whereas CLARA conﬁnes the candidate medoids to only a random sample of the data set. A randomized algorithm called CLARANS (Clustering Large Applications based upon RANdomized Search) presents a trade-off between the cost and the effectiveness of using samples to obtain clustering. First, it randomly selects k objects in the data set as the current medoids. It then randomly selects a current medoid x and an object y that is not one of the current medoids. Can replacing x by y improve the absolute-error criterion? If yes, the replace- ment is made. CLARANS conducts such a randomized search l times. The set of the current medoids after the l steps is considered a local optimum. CLARANS repeats this randomized process m times and returns the best local optimal as the ﬁnal result. 10.3 Hierarchical Methods While partitioning methods meet the basic clustering requirement of organizing a set of objects into a number of exclusive groups, in some situations we may want to partition our data into groups at different levels such as in a hierarchy. A hierarchical clustering method works by grouping data objects into a hierarchy or “tree” of clusters. Representing data objects in the form of a hierarchy is useful for data summarization and visualization. For example, as the manager of human resources at AllElectronics, 458 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods you may organize your employees into major groups such as executives, managers, and staff. You can further partition these groups into smaller subgroups. For instance, the general group of staff can be further divided into subgroups of senior ofﬁcers, ofﬁcers, and trainees. All these groups form a hierarchy. We can easily summarize or characterize the data that are organized into a hierarchy, which can be used to ﬁnd, say, the average salary of managers and of ofﬁcers. Consider handwritten character recognition as another example. A set of handwrit- ing samples may be ﬁrst partitioned into general groups where each group corresponds to a unique character. Some groups can be further partitioned into subgroups since a character may be written in multiple substantially different ways. If necessary, the hierarchical partitioning can be continued recursively until a desired granularity is reached. In the previous examples, although we partitioned the data hierarchically, we did not assume that the data have a hierarchical structure (e.g., managers are at the same level in our AllElectronics hierarchy as staff). Our use of a hierarchy here is just to summarize and represent the underlying data in a compressed way. Such a hierarchy is particularly useful for data visualization. Alternatively, in some applications we may believe that the data bear an underly- ing hierarchical structure that we want to discover. For example, hierarchical clustering may uncover a hierarchy for AllElectronics employees structured on, say, salary. In the study of evolution, hierarchical clustering may group animals according to their bio- logical features to uncover evolutionary paths, which are a hierarchy of species. As another example, grouping conﬁgurations of a strategic game (e.g., chess or checkers) in a hierarchical way may help to develop game strategies that can be used to train players. In this section, you will study hierarchical clustering methods. Section 10.3.1 begins with a discussion of agglomerative versus divisive hierarchical clustering, which organize objects into a hierarchy using a bottom-up or top-down strategy, respectively. Agglo- merative methods start with individual objects as clusters, which are iteratively merged to form larger clusters. Conversely, divisive methods initially let all the given objects form one cluster, which they iteratively split into smaller clusters. Hierarchical clustering methods can encounter difﬁculties regarding the selection of merge or split points. Such a decision is critical, because once a group of objects is merged or split, the process at the next step will operate on the newly generated clusters. It will neither undo what was done previously, nor perform object swapping between clusters. Thus, merge or split decisions, if not well chosen, may lead to low-quality clusters. Moreover, the methods do not scale well because each decision of merge or split needs to examine and evaluate many objects or clusters. A promising direction for improving the clustering quality of hierarchical meth- ods is to integrate hierarchical clustering with other clustering techniques, resulting in multiple-phase (or multiphase) clustering. We introduce two such methods, namely BIRCH and Chameleon. BIRCH (Section 10.3.3) begins by partitioning objects hierar- chically using tree structures, where the leaf or low-level nonleaf nodes can be viewed as “microclusters” depending on the resolution scale. It then applies other 10.3 Hierarchical Methods 459 clustering algorithms to perform macroclustering on the microclusters. Chameleon (Section 10.3.4) explores dynamic modeling in hierarchical clustering. There are several orthogonal ways to categorize hierarchical clustering methods. For instance, they may be categorized into algorithmic methods, probabilistic methods, and Bayesian methods. Agglomerative, divisive, and multiphase methods are algorithmic, meaning they consider data objects as deterministic and compute clusters according to the deterministic distances between objects. Probabilistic methods use probabilistic models to capture clusters and measure the quality of clusters by the ﬁtness of mod- els. We discuss probabilistic hierarchical clustering in Section 10.3.5. Bayesian methods compute a distribution of possible clusterings. That is, instead of outputting a single deterministic clustering over a data set, they return a group of clustering structures and their probabilities, conditional on the given data. Bayesian methods are considered an advanced topic and are not discussed in this book. 10.3.1 Agglomerative versus Divisive Hierarchical Clustering A hierarchical clustering method can be either agglomerative or divisive, depending on whether the hierarchical decomposition is formed in a bottom-up (merging) or top- down (splitting) fashion. Let’s have a closer look at these strategies. An agglomerative hierarchical clustering method uses a bottom-up strategy. It typ- ically starts by letting each object form its own cluster and iteratively merges clusters into larger and larger clusters, until all the objects are in a single cluster or certain termi- nation conditions are satisﬁed. The single cluster becomes the hierarchy’s root. For the merging step, it ﬁnds the two clusters that are closest to each other (according to some similarity measure), and combines the two to form one cluster. Because two clusters are merged per iteration, where each cluster contains at least one object, an agglomerative method requires at most n iterations. A divisive hierarchical clustering method employs a top-down strategy. It starts by placing all objects in one cluster, which is the hierarchy’s root. It then divides the root cluster into several smaller subclusters, and recursively partitions those clusters into smaller ones. The partitioning process continues until each cluster at the lowest level is coherent enough—either containing only one object, or the objects within a cluster are sufﬁciently similar to each other. In either agglomerative or divisive hierarchical clustering, a user can specify the desired number of clusters as a termination condition. Example 10.3 Agglomerative versus divisive hierarchical clustering. Figure 10.6 shows the appli- cation of AGNES (AGglomerative NESting), an agglomerative hierarchical clustering method, and DIANA (DIvisive ANAlysis), a divisive hierarchical clustering method, on a data set of ﬁve objects, {a,b,c,d,e}. Initially, AGNES, the agglomerative method, places each object into a cluster of its own. The clusters are then merged step-by-step according to some criterion. For example, clusters C1 and C2 may be merged if an object in C1 and an object in C2 form the minimum Euclidean distance between any two objects from 460 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods a ab b c d e de cde abcde Step 0 Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Step 4 Step 3 Step 2 Step 1 Step 0 Divisive (DIANA) Agglomerative (AGNES) Figure 10.6 Agglomerative and divisive hierarchical clustering on data objects {a,b,c,d,e}. Level l=0 l=1 l=2 l=3 l=4 a b c d e 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 Similarity scale Figure 10.7 Dendrogram representation for hierarchical clustering of data objects {a,b,c,d,e}. different clusters. This is a single-linkage approach in that each cluster is represented by all the objects in the cluster, and the similarity between two clusters is measured by the similarity of the closest pair of data points belonging to different clusters. The cluster-merging process repeats until all the objects are eventually merged to form one cluster. DIANA, the divisive method, proceeds in the contrasting way. All the objects are used to form one initial cluster. The cluster is split according to some principle such as the maximum Euclidean distance between the closest neighboring objects in the cluster. The cluster-splitting process repeats until, eventually, each new cluster contains only a single object. A tree structure called a dendrogram is commonly used to represent the process of hierarchical clustering. It shows how objects are grouped together (in an agglomerative method) or partitioned (in a divisive method) step-by-step. Figure 10.7 shows a den- drogram for the ﬁve objects presented in Figure 10.6, where l = 0 shows the ﬁve objects as singleton clusters at level 0. At l = 1, objects a and b are grouped together to form the 10.3 Hierarchical Methods 461 ﬁrst cluster, and they stay together at all subsequent levels. We can also use a vertical axis to show the similarity scale between clusters. For example, when the similarity of two groups of objects, {a,b} and {c,d,e}, is roughly 0.16, they are merged together to form a single cluster. A challenge with divisive methods is how to partition a large cluster into several smaller ones. For example, there are 2n−1 −1 possible ways to partition a set of n objects into two exclusive subsets, where n is the number of objects. When n is large, it is com- putationally prohibitive to examine all possibilities. Consequently, a divisive method typically uses heuristics in partitioning, which can lead to inaccurate results. For the sake of efﬁciency, divisive methods typically do not backtrack on partitioning decisions that have been made. Once a cluster is partitioned, any alternative partitioning of this cluster will not be considered again. Due to the challenges in divisive methods, there are many more agglomerative methods than divisive methods. 10.3.2 Distance Measures in Algorithmic Methods Whether using an agglomerative method or a divisive method, a core need is to measure the distance between two clusters, where each cluster is generally a set of objects. Four widely used measures for distance between clusters are as follows, where |p −p′| is the distance between two objects or points, p and p′; mi is the mean for cluster, Ci; and ni is the number of objects in Ci. They are also known as linkage measures. Minimum distance: distmin(Ci,Cj) = min p∈Ci,p′∈Cj {|p −p′|} (10.3) Maximum distance: distmax(Ci,Cj) = max p∈Ci,p′∈Cj {|p −p′|} (10.4) Mean distance: distmean(Ci,Cj) = |mi −mj| (10.5) Average distance: distavg(Ci,Cj) = 1 ninj X p∈Ci,p′∈Cj |p −p′| (10.6) When an algorithm uses the minimum distance, dmin(Ci,Cj), to measure the distance between clusters, it is sometimes called a nearest-neighbor clustering algorithm. More- over, if the clustering process is terminated when the distance between nearest clusters exceeds a user-deﬁned threshold, it is called a single-linkage algorithm. If we view the data points as nodes of a graph, with edges forming a path between the nodes in a cluster, then the merging of two clusters, Ci and Cj, corresponds to adding an edge between the nearest pair of nodes in Ci and Cj. Because edges linking clusters always go between dis- tinct clusters, the resulting graph will generate a tree. Thus, an agglomerative hierar- chical clustering algorithm that uses the minimum distance measure is also called a 462 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods minimal spanning tree algorithm, where a spanning tree of a graph is a tree that connects all vertices, and a minimal spanning tree is the one with the least sum of edge weights. When an algorithm uses the maximum distance, dmax(Ci,Cj), to measure the distance between clusters, it is sometimes called a farthest-neighbor clustering algorithm. If the clustering process is terminated when the maximum distance between nearest clusters exceeds a user-deﬁned threshold, it is called a complete-linkage algorithm. By viewing data points as nodes of a graph, with edges linking nodes, we can think of each cluster as a complete subgraph, that is, with edges connecting all the nodes in the clusters. The dis- tance between two clusters is determined by the most distant nodes in the two clusters. Farthest-neighbor algorithms tend to minimize the increase in diameter of the clusters at each iteration. If the true clusters are rather compact and approximately equal size, the method will produce high-quality clusters. Otherwise, the clusters produced can be meaningless. The previous minimum and maximum measures represent two extremes in mea- suring the distance between clusters. They tend to be overly sensitive to outliers or noisy data. The use of mean or average distance is a compromise between the mini- mum and maximum distances and overcomes the outlier sensitivity problem. Whereas the mean distance is the simplest to compute, the average distance is advantageous in that it can handle categoric as well as numeric data. The computation of the mean vector for categoric data can be difﬁcult or impossible to deﬁne. Example 10.4 Single versus complete linkages. Let us apply hierarchical clustering to the data set of Figure 10.8(a). Figure 10.8(b) shows the dendrogram using single linkage. Figure 10.8(c) shows the case using complete linkage, where the edges between clusters {A,B,J,H} and {C,D,G,F,E} are omitted for ease of presentation. This example shows that by using single linkages we can ﬁnd hierarchical clusters deﬁned by local proximity, whereas complete linkage tends to ﬁnd clusters opting for global closeness. There are variations of the four essential linkage measures just discussed. For exam- ple, we can measure the distance between two clusters by the distance between the centroids (i.e., the central objects) of the clusters. 10.3.3 BIRCH: Multiphase Hierarchical Clustering Using Clustering Feature Trees Balanced Iterative Reducing and Clustering using Hierarchies (BIRCH) is designed for clustering a large amount of numeric data by integrating hierarchical clustering (at the initial microclustering stage) and other clustering methods such as iterative partitioning (at the later macroclustering stage). It overcomes the two difﬁculties in agglomerative clustering methods: (1) scalability and (2) the inability to undo what was done in the previous step. BIRCH uses the notions of clustering feature to summarize a cluster, and clus- tering feature tree (CF-tree) to represent a cluster hierarchy. These structures help 10.3 Hierarchical Methods 463 A B C D E F G H J E A B C D F G H J E A B C D F G H J (a) Data set E A B C D F G H J C D H J A B E F G (b) Clustering using single linkage (c) Clustering using complete linkage Figure 10.8 Hierarchical clustering using single and complete linkages. the clustering method achieve good speed and scalability in large or even streaming databases, and also make it effective for incremental and dynamic clustering of incoming objects. Consider a cluster of n d-dimensional data objects or points. The clustering feature (CF) of the cluster is a 3-D vector summarizing information about clusters of objects. It is deﬁned as CF = ⟨n,LS,SS⟩, (10.7) where LS is the linear sum of the n points (i.e., Pn i=1 xi), and SS is the square sum of the data points (i.e., Pn i=1 xi2). A clustering feature is essentially a summary of the statistics for the given cluster. Using a clustering feature, we can easily derive many useful statistics of a cluster. For example, the cluster’s centroid, x0, radius, R, and diameter, D, are x0 = nP i=1 xi n = LS n , (10.8) 464 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods R = v u u u u t n X i=1 (xi −x0)2 n = s nSS −2LS2 + nLS n2 , (10.9) D = v u u u u t n X i=1 n X j=1 (xi −xj)2 n(n −1) = s 2nSS −2LS2 n(n −1) . (10.10) Here, R is the average distance from member objects to the centroid, and D is the aver- age pairwise distance within a cluster. Both R and D reﬂect the tightness of the cluster around the centroid. Summarizing a cluster using the clustering feature can avoid storing the detailed information about individual objects or points. Instead, we only need a constant size of space to store the clustering feature. This is the key to BIRCH efﬁciency in space. Moreover, clustering features are additive. That is, for two disjoint clusters, C1 and C2, with the clustering features CF1 = ⟨n1,LS1,SS1⟩and CF2 = ⟨n2,LS2,SS2⟩, respectively, the clustering feature for the cluster that formed by merging C1 and C2 is simply CF1 + CF2 = ⟨n1 + n2,LS1 + LS2,SS1 + SS2⟩. (10.11) Example 10.5 Clustering feature. Suppose there are three points, (2,5),(3,2), and (4,3), in a cluster, C1. The clustering feature of C1 is CF1 = ⟨3,(2 + 3 + 4,5 + 2 + 3),(22 + 32 + 42,52 + 22 + 32)⟩= ⟨3,(9,10),(29,38)⟩. Suppose that C1 is disjoint to a second cluster, C2, where CF2 = ⟨3,(35,36),(417,440)⟩. The clustering feature of a new cluster, C3, that is formed by merging C1 and C2, is derived by adding CF1 and CF2. That is, CF3 = ⟨3 + 3,(9 + 35,10 + 36),(29 + 417,38 + 440)⟩= ⟨6,(44,46),(446,478)⟩. A CF-tree is a height-balanced tree that stores the clustering features for a hierar- chical clustering. An example is shown in Figure 10.9. By deﬁnition, a nonleaf node in a tree has descendants or “children.” The nonleaf nodes store sums of the CFs of their children, and thus summarize clustering information about their children. A CF-tree has two parameters: branching factor, B, and threshold, T. The branching factor speciﬁes the maximum number of children per nonleaf node. The threshold parameter speciﬁes the maximum diameter of subclusters stored at the leaf nodes of the tree. These two parameters implicitly control the resulting tree’s size. Given a limited amount of main memory, an important consideration in BIRCH is to minimize the time required for input/output (I/O). BIRCH applies a multiphase clustering technique: A single scan of the data set yields a basic, good clustering, and 10.3 Hierarchical Methods 465 Root level First level CF1 CF2 CFk CF1k CF11 CF12 Figure 10.9 CF-tree structure. one or more additional scans can optionally be used to further improve the quality. The primary phases are Phase 1: BIRCH scans the database to build an initial in-memory CF-tree, which can be viewed as a multilevel compression of the data that tries to preserve the data’s inherent clustering structure. Phase 2: BIRCH applies a (selected) clustering algorithm to cluster the leaf nodes of the CF-tree, which removes sparse clusters as outliers and groups dense clusters into larger ones. For Phase 1, the CF-tree is built dynamically as objects are inserted. Thus, the method is incremental. An object is inserted into the closest leaf entry (subcluster). If the dia- meter of the subcluster stored in the leaf node after insertion is larger than the threshold value, then the leaf node and possibly other nodes are split. After the insertion of the new object, information about the object is passed toward the root of the tree. The size of the CF-tree can be changed by modifying the threshold. If the size of the memory that is needed for storing the CF-tree is larger than the size of the main memory, then a larger threshold value can be speciﬁed and the CF-tree is rebuilt. The rebuild process is performed by building a new tree from the leaf nodes of the old tree. Thus, the process of rebuilding the tree is done without the necessity of rereading all the objects or points. This is similar to the insertion and node split in the construc- tion of B+-trees. Therefore, for building the tree, data has to be read just once. Some heuristics and methods have been introduced to deal with outliers and improve the qual- ity of CF-trees by additional scans of the data. Once the CF-tree is built, any clustering algorithm, such as a typical partitioning algorithm, can be used with the CF-tree in Phase 2. “How effective is BIRCH?” The time complexity of the algorithm is O(n), where n is the number of objects to be clustered. Experiments have shown the linear scalability of the algorithm with respect to the number of objects, and good quality of clustering of the data. However, since each node in a CF-tree can hold only a limited number of entries due to its size, a CF-tree node does not always correspond to what a user may consider a natural cluster. Moreover, if the clusters are not spherical in shape, BIRCH does not perform well because it uses the notion of radius or diameter to control the boundary of a cluster. 466 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods The ideas of clustering features and CF-trees have been applied beyond BIRCH. The ideas have been borrowed by many others to tackle problems of clustering streaming and dynamic data. 10.3.4 Chameleon: Multiphase Hierarchical Clustering Using Dynamic Modeling Chameleon is a hierarchical clustering algorithm that uses dynamic modeling to deter- mine the similarity between pairs of clusters. In Chameleon, cluster similarity is assessed based on (1) how well connected objects are within a cluster and (2) the proximity of clusters. That is, two clusters are merged if their interconnectivity is high and they are close together. Thus, Chameleon does not depend on a static, user-supplied model and can automatically adapt to the internal characteristics of the clusters being merged. The merge process facilitates the discovery of natural and homogeneous clusters and applies to all data types as long as a similarity function can be speciﬁed. Figure 10.10 illustrates how Chameleon works. Chameleon uses a k-nearest-neighbor graph approach to construct a sparse graph, where each vertex of the graph represents a data object, and there exists an edge between two vertices (objects) if one object is among the k-most similar objects to the other. The edges are weighted to reﬂect the similarity between objects. Chameleon uses a graph partitioning algorithm to partition the k-nearest-neighbor graph into a large number of relatively small subclusters such that it minimizes the edge cut. That is, a cluster C is partitioned into subclusters Ci and Cj so as to minimize the weight of the edges that would be cut should C be bisected into Ci and Cj. It assesses the absolute interconnectivity between clusters Ci and Cj. Chameleon then uses an agglomerative hierarchical clustering algorithm that itera- tively merges subclusters based on their similarity. To determine the pairs of most similar subclusters, it takes into account both the interconnectivity and the closeness of the clus- ters. Speciﬁcally, Chameleon determines the similarity between each pair of clusters Ci and Cj according to their relative interconnectivity, RI(Ci,Cj), and their relative closeness, RC(Ci,Cj). The relative interconnectivity, RI(Ci,Cj), between two clusters, Ci and Cj, is deﬁned as the absolute interconnectivity between Ci and Cj, normalized with respect to the Data set Construct a sparse graph Partition the graph Merge partitions k-nearest-neighbor graph Final clusters Figure 10.10 Chameleon: hierarchical clustering based on k-nearest neighbors and dynamic modeling. Source: Based on Karypis, Han, and Kumar [KHK99]. 10.3 Hierarchical Methods 467 internal interconnectivity of the two clusters, Ci and Cj. That is, RI(Ci,Cj) = |EC{Ci,Cj}| 1 2(|ECCi| + |ECCj|) , (10.12) where EC{Ci,Cj} is the edge cut as previously deﬁned for a cluster containing both Ci and Cj. Similarly, ECCi (or ECCj) is the minimum sum of the cut edges that partition Ci (or Cj) into two roughly equal parts. The relative closeness, RC(Ci,Cj), between a pair of clusters, Ci and Cj, is the abso- lute closeness between Ci and Cj, normalized with respect to the internal closeness of the two clusters, Ci and Cj. It is deﬁned as RC(Ci,Cj) = SEC{Ci,Cj} |Ci| |Ci|+|Cj|SECCi + |Cj| |Ci|+|Cj|SECCj , (10.13) where SEC{Ci,Cj} is the average weight of the edges that connect vertices in Ci to vertices in Cj, and SECCi (or SECCj ) is the average weight of the edges that belong to the min- cut bisector of cluster Ci (or Cj). Chameleon has been shown to have greater power at discovering arbitrarily shaped clusters of high quality than several well-known algorithms such as BIRCH and density- based DBSCAN (Section 10.4.1). However, the processing cost for high-dimensional data may require O(n2) time for n objects in the worst case. 10.3.5 Probabilistic Hierarchical Clustering Algorithmic hierarchical clustering methods using linkage measures tend to be easy to understand and are often efﬁcient in clustering. They are commonly used in many clus- tering analysis applications. However, algorithmic hierarchical clustering methods can suffer from several drawbacks. First, choosing a good distance measure for hierarchical clustering is often far from trivial. Second, to apply an algorithmic method, the data objects cannot have any missing attribute values. In the case of data that are partially observed (i.e., some attribute values of some objects are missing), it is not easy to apply an algorithmic hierarchical clustering method because the distance computation cannot be conducted. Third, most of the algorithmic hierarchical clustering methods are heuris- tic, and at each step locally search for a good merging/splitting decision. Consequently, the optimization goal of the resulting cluster hierarchy can be unclear. Probabilistic hierarchical clustering aims to overcome some of these disadvantages by using probabilistic models to measure distances between clusters. One way to look at the clustering problem is to regard the set of data objects to be clustered as a sample of the underlying data generation mechanism to be analyzed or, formally, the generative model. For example, when we conduct clustering analysis on a set of marketing surveys, we assume that the surveys collected are a sample of the opinions of all possible customers. Here, the data generation mechanism is a probability 468 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods distribution of opinions with respect to different customers, which cannot be obtained directly and completely. The task of clustering is to estimate the generative model as accurately as possible using the observed data objects to be clustered. In practice, we can assume that the data generative models adopt common distri- bution functions, such as Gaussian distribution or Bernoulli distribution, which are governed by parameters. The task of learning a generative model is then reduced to ﬁnding the parameter values for which the model best ﬁts the observed data set. Example 10.6 Generative model. Suppose we are given a set of 1-D points X = {x1,...,xn} for clustering analysis. Let us assume that the data points are generated by a Gaussian distribution, N(µ,σ 2) = 1 √ 2πσ 2 e−(x−µ)2 2σ2 , (10.14) where the parameters are µ (the mean) and σ 2 (the variance). The probability that a point xi ∈X is then generated by the model is P(xi|µ,σ 2) = 1 √ 2πσ 2 e−(xi−µ)2 2σ2 . (10.15) Consequently, the likelihood that X is generated by the model is L(N(µ,σ 2) : X) = P(X|µ,σ 2) = n Y i=1 1 √ 2πσ 2 e−(xi−µ)2 2σ2 . (10.16) The task of learning the generative model is to ﬁnd the parameters µ and σ 2 such that the likelihood L(N(µ,σ 2) : X) is maximized, that is, ﬁnding N(µ0,σ 2 0 ) = argmax{L(N(µ,σ 2) : X)}, (10.17) where max{L(N(µ,σ 2) : X)} is called the maximum likelihood. Given a set of objects, the quality of a cluster formed by all the objects can be measured by the maximum likelihood. For a set of objects partitioned into m clusters C1,...,Cm, the quality can be measured by Q({C1,...,Cm}) = m Y i=1 P(Ci), (10.18) 10.3 Hierarchical Methods 469 where P() is the maximum likelihood. If we merge two clusters, Cj1 and Cj2, into a cluster, Cj1 ∪Cj2, then, the change in quality of the overall clustering is Q(({C1,...,Cm} −{Cj1,Cj2}) ∪{Cj1 ∪Cj2}) −Q({C1,...,Cm}) = Qm i=1 P(Ci) · P(Cj1 ∪Cj2) P(Cj1)P(Cj2) − m Y i=1 P(Ci) = m Y i=1 P(Ci)  P(Cj1 ∪Cj2) P(Cj1)P(Cj2) −1  . (10.19) When choosing to merge two clusters in hierarchical clustering, Qm i=1 P(Ci) is constant for any pair of clusters. Therefore, given clusters C1 and C2, the distance between them can be measured by dist(Ci,Cj) = −log P(C1 ∪C2) P(C1)P(C2). (10.20) A probabilistic hierarchical clustering method can adopt the agglomerative clustering framework, but use probabilistic models (Eq. 10.20) to measure the distance between clusters. Upon close observation of Eq. (10.19), we see that merging two clusters may not always lead to an improvement in clustering quality, that is, P(Cj1∪Cj2) P(Cj1)P(Cj2) may be less than 1. For example, assume that Gaussian distribution functions are used in the model of Figure 10.11. Although merging clusters C1 and C2 results in a cluster that better ﬁts a Gaussian distribution, merging clusters C3 and C4 lowers the clustering quality because no Gaussian functions can ﬁt the merged cluster well. Based on this observation, a probabilistic hierarchical clustering scheme can start with one cluster per object, and merge two clusters, Ci and Cj, if the distance between them is negative. In each iteration, we try to ﬁnd Ci and Cj so as to maximize log P(Ci∪Cj) P(Ci)P(Cj). The iteration continues as long as log P(Ci∪Cj) P(Ci)P(Cj) > 0, that is, as long as there is an improvement in clustering quality. The pseudocode is given in Figure 10.12. Probabilistic hierarchical clustering methods are easy to understand, and generally have the same efﬁciency as algorithmic agglomerative hierarchical clustering methods; in fact, they share the same framework. Probabilistic models are more interpretable, but sometimes less ﬂexible than distance metrics. Probabilistic models can handle partially observed data. For example, given a multidimensional data set where some objects have missing values on some dimensions, we can learn a Gaussian model on each dimen- sion independently using the observed values on the dimension. The resulting cluster hierarchy accomplishes the optimization goal of ﬁtting data to the selected probabilistic models. A drawback of using probabilistic hierarchical clustering is that it outputs only one hierarchy with respect to a chosen probabilistic model. It cannot handle the uncer- tainty of cluster hierarchies. Given a data set, there may exist multiple hierarchies that 470 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods C1 C2 (a) C3 C4 (b) (c) Figure 10.11 Merging clusters in probabilistic hierarchical clustering: (a) Merging clusters C1 and C2 leads to an increase in overall cluster quality, but merging clusters (b) C3 and (c) C4 does not. Algorithm: A probabilistic hierarchical clustering algorithm. Input: D = {o1,...,on}: a data set containing n objects; Output: A hierarchy of clusters. Method: (1) create a cluster for each object Ci = {oi}, 1 ≤i ≤n; (2) for i = 1 to n (3) ﬁnd pair of clusters Ci and Cj such that Ci,Cj = argmaxi̸=j log P(Ci∪Cj) P(Ci)P(Cj); (4) if log P(Ci∪Cj) P(Ci)P(Cj) > 0 then merge Ci and Cj; (5) else stop; Figure 10.12 A probabilistic hierarchical clustering algorithm. ﬁt the observed data. Neither algorithmic approaches nor probabilistic approaches can ﬁnd the distribution of such hierarchies. Recently, Bayesian tree-structured models have been developed to handle such problems. Bayesian and other sophisticated probabilistic clustering methods are considered advanced topics and are not covered in this book. 10.4 Density-Based Methods 471 10.4 Density-Based Methods Partitioning and hierarchical methods are designed to ﬁnd spherical-shaped clusters. They have difﬁculty ﬁnding clusters of arbitrary shape such as the “S” shape and oval clusters in Figure 10.13. Given such data, they would likely inaccurately identify convex regions, where noise or outliers are included in the clusters. To ﬁnd clusters of arbitrary shape, alternatively, we can model clusters as dense regions in the data space, separated by sparse regions. This is the main strategy behind density-based clustering methods, which can discover clusters of nonspherical shape. In this section, you will learn the basic techniques of density-based clustering by studying three representative methods, namely, DBSCAN (Section 10.4.1), OPTICS (Section 10.4.2), and DENCLUE (Section 10.4.3). 10.4.1 DBSCAN: Density-Based Clustering Based on Connected Regions with High Density “How can we ﬁnd dense regions in density-based clustering?” The density of an object o can be measured by the number of objects close to o. DBSCAN (Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise) ﬁnds core objects, that is, objects that have dense neighborhoods. It connects core objects and their neighborhoods to form dense regions as clusters. “How does DBSCAN quantify the neighborhood of an object?” A user-speciﬁed para- meter ϵ > 0 is used to specify the radius of a neighborhood we consider for every object. The ϵ-neighborhood of an object o is the space within a radius ϵ centered at o. Due to the ﬁxed neighborhood size parameterized by ϵ, the density of a neighbor- hood can be measured simply by the number of objects in the neighborhood. To deter- mine whether a neighborhood is dense or not, DBSCAN uses another user-speciﬁed Figure 10.13 Clusters of arbitrary shape. 472 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods parameter, MinPts, which speciﬁes the density threshold of dense regions. An object is a core object if the ϵ-neighborhood of the object contains at least MinPts objects. Core objects are the pillars of dense regions. Given a set, D, of objects, we can identify all core objects with respect to the given parameters, ϵ and MinPts. The clustering task is therein reduced to using core objects and their neighborhoods to form dense regions, where the dense regions are clusters. For a core object q and an object p, we say that p is directly density-reachable from q (with respect to ϵ and MinPts) if p is within the ϵ-neighborhood of q. Clearly, an object p is directly density-reachable from another object q if and only if q is a core object and p is in the ϵ-neighborhood of q. Using the directly density-reachable relation, a core object can “bring” all objects from its ϵ-neighborhood into a dense region. “How can we assemble a large dense region using small dense regions centered by core objects?” In DBSCAN, p is density-reachable from q (with respect to ϵ and MinPts in D) if there is a chain of objects p1,...,pn, such that p1 = q, pn = p, and pi+1 is directly density-reachable from pi with respect to ϵ and MinPts, for 1 ≤i ≤n, pi ∈D. Note that density-reachability is not an equivalence relation because it is not symmetric. If both o1 and o2 are core objects and o1 is density-reachable from o2, then o2 is density-reachable from o1. However, if o2 is a core object but o1 is not, then o1 may be density-reachable from o2, but not vice versa. To connect core objects as well as their neighbors in a dense region, DBSCAN uses the notion of density-connectedness. Two objects p1,p2 ∈D are density-connected with respect to ϵ and MinPts if there is an object q ∈D such that both p1 and p2 are density- reachable from q with respect to ϵ and MinPts. Unlike density-reachability, density- connectedness is an equivalence relation. It is easy to show that, for objects o1, o2, and o3, if o1 and o2 are density-connected, and o2 and o3 are density-connected, then so are o1 and o3. Example 10.7 Density-reachability and density-connectivity. Consider Figure 10.14 for a given ϵ represented by the radius of the circles, and, say, let MinPts = 3. Of the labeled points, m,p,o,r are core objects because each is in an ϵ-neighborhood containing at least three points. Object q is directly density-reachable from m. Object m is directly density-reachable from p and vice versa. Object q is (indirectly) density-reachable from p because q is directly density- reachable from m and m is directly density-reachable from p. However, p is not density- reachable from q because q is not a core object. Similarly, r and s are density-reachable from o and o is density-reachable from r. Thus, o, r, and s are all density-connected. We can use the closure of density-connectedness to ﬁnd connected dense regions as clusters. Each closed set is a density-based cluster. A subset C ⊆D is a cluster if (1) for any two objects o1,o2 ∈C, o1 and o2 are density-connected; and (2) there does not exist an object o ∈C and another object o′ ∈(D −C) such that o and o′ are density- connected. 10.4 Density-Based Methods 473 q m p s o r Figure 10.14 Density-reachability and density-connectivity in density-based clustering. Source: Based on Ester, Kriegel, Sander, and Xu [EKSX96]. “How does DBSCAN ﬁnd clusters?” Initially, all objects in a given data set D are marked as “unvisited.” DBSCAN randomly selects an unvisited object p, marks p as “visited,” and checks whether the ϵ-neighborhood of p contains at least MinPts objects. If not, p is marked as a noise point. Otherwise, a new cluster C is created for p, and all the objects in the ϵ-neighborhood of p are added to a candidate set, N. DBSCAN iter- atively adds to C those objects in N that do not belong to any cluster. In this process, for an object p′ in N that carries the label “unvisited,” DBSCAN marks it as “visited” and checks its ϵ-neighborhood. If the ϵ-neighborhood of p′ has at least MinPts objects, those objects in the ϵ-neighborhood of p′ are added to N. DBSCAN continues adding objects to C until C can no longer be expanded, that is, N is empty. At this time, cluster C is completed, and thus is output. To ﬁnd the next cluster, DBSCAN randomly selects an unvisited object from the remaining ones. The clustering process continues until all objects are visited. The pseudocode of the DBSCAN algorithm is given in Figure 10.15. If a spatial index is used, the computational complexity of DBSCAN is O(nlogn), where n is the number of database objects. Otherwise, the complexity is O(n2). With appropriate settings of the user-deﬁned parameters, ϵ and MinPts, the algorithm is effective in ﬁnding arbitrary-shaped clusters. 10.4.2 OPTICS: Ordering Points to Identify the Clustering Structure Although DBSCAN can cluster objects given input parameters such as ϵ (the maxi- mum radius of a neighborhood) and MinPts (the minimum number of points required in the neighborhood of a core object), it encumbers users with the responsibility of selecting parameter values that will lead to the discovery of acceptable clusters. This is a problem associated with many other clustering algorithms. Such parameter settings 474 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods Algorithm: DBSCAN: a density-based clustering algorithm. Input: D: a data set containing n objects, ϵ: the radius parameter, and MinPts: the neighborhood density threshold. Output: A set of density-based clusters. Method: (1) mark all objects as unvisited; (2) do (3) randomly select an unvisited object p; (4) mark p as visited; (5) if the ϵ-neighborhood of p has at least MinPts objects (6) create a new cluster C, and add p to C; (7) let N be the set of objects in the ϵ-neighborhood of p; (8) for each point p′ in N (9) if p′ is unvisited (10) mark p′ as visited; (11) if the ϵ-neighborhood of p′ has at least MinPts points, add those points to N; (12) if p′ is not yet a member of any cluster, add p′ to C; (13) end for (14) output C; (15) else mark p as noise; (16) until no object is unvisited; Figure 10.15 DBSCAN algorithm. are usually empirically set and difﬁcult to determine, especially for real-world, high- dimensional data sets. Most algorithms are sensitive to these parameter values: Slightly different settings may lead to very different clusterings of the data. Moreover, real-world, high-dimensional data sets often have very skewed distributions such that their intrin- sic clustering structure may not be well characterized by a single set of global density parameters. Note that density-based clusters are monotonic with respect to the neighborhood threshold. That is, in DBSCAN, for a ﬁxed MinPts value and two neighborhood thresh- olds, ϵ1 < ϵ2, a cluster C with respect to ϵ1 and MinPts must be a subset of a cluster C′ with respect to ϵ2 and MinPts. This means that if two objects are in a density-based cluster, they must also be in a cluster with a lower density requirement. To overcome the difﬁculty in using one set of global parameters in clustering analy- sis, a cluster analysis method called OPTICS was proposed. OPTICS does not explicitly produce a data set clustering. Instead, it outputs a cluster ordering. This is a linear list 10.4 Density-Based Methods 475 of all objects under analysis and represents the density-based clustering structure of the data. Objects in a denser cluster are listed closer to each other in the cluster ordering. This ordering is equivalent to density-based clustering obtained from a wide range of parameter settings. Thus, OPTICS does not require the user to provide a speciﬁc density threshold. The cluster ordering can be used to extract basic clustering information (e.g., cluster centers, or arbitrary-shaped clusters), derive the intrinsic clustering structure, as well as provide a visualization of the clustering. To construct the different clusterings simultaneously, the objects are processed in a speciﬁc order. This order selects an object that is density-reachable with respect to the lowest ϵ value so that clusters with higher density (lower ϵ) will be ﬁnished ﬁrst. Based on this idea, OPTICS needs two important pieces of information per object: The core-distance of an object p is the smallest value ϵ′ such that the ϵ′-neighborhood of p has at least MinPts objects. That is, ϵ′ is the minimum dis- tance threshold that makes p a core object. If p is not a core object with respect to ϵ and MinPts, the core-distance of p is undeﬁned. The reachability-distance to object p from q is the minimum radius value that makes p density-reachable from q. According to the deﬁnition of density-reachability, q has to be a core object and p must be in the neighborhood of q. Therefore, the reachability-distance from q to p is max{core-distance(q), dist(p, q)}. If q is not a core object with respect to ϵ and MinPts, the reachability-distance to p from q is undeﬁned. An object p may be directly reachable from multiple core objects. Therefore, p may have multiple reachability-distances with respect to different core objects. The smallest reachability-distance of p is of particular interest because it gives the shortest path for which p is connected to a dense cluster. Example 10.8 Core-distance and reachability-distance. Figure 10.16 illustrates the concepts of core- distance and reachability-distance. Suppose that ϵ = 6 mm and MinPts = 5. The core- distance of p is the distance, ϵ′, between p and the fourth closest data object from p. The reachability-distance of q1 from p is the core-distance of p (i.e., ϵ′ = 3mm) because this is greater than the Euclidean distance from p to q1. The reachability-distance of q2 with respect to p is the Euclidean distance from p to q2 because this is greater than the core-distance of p. OPTICS computes an ordering of all objects in a given database and, for each object in the database, stores the core-distance and a suitable reachability-distance. OPTICS maintains a list called OrderSeeds to generate the output ordering. Objects in Order- Seeds are sorted by the reachability-distance from their respective closest core objects, that is, by the smallest reachability-distance of each object. OPTICS begins with an arbitrary object from the input database as the current object, p. It retrieves the ϵ-neighborhood of p, determines the core-distance, and sets the reachability-distance to undeﬁned. The current object, p, is then written to output. 476 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods Core-distance of p Reachability-distance (p, q1) = = 3mm Reachability-distance (p, q2) = dist (p, q2) p = 3mm p q1 q2 = 6 mm  = 6 mm   Figure 10.16 OPTICS terminology. Source: Based on Ankerst, Breunig, Kriegel, and Sander [ABKS99]. If p is not a core object, OPTICS simply moves on to the next object in the OrderSeeds list (or the input database if OrderSeeds is empty). If p is a core object, then for each object, q, in the ϵ-neighborhood of p, OPTICS updates its reachability-distance from p and inserts q into OrderSeeds if q has not yet been processed. The iteration continues until the input is fully consumed and OrderSeeds is empty. A data set’s cluster ordering can be represented graphically, which helps to visual- ize and understand the clustering structure in a data set. For example, Figure 10.17 is the reachability plot for a simple 2-D data set, which presents a general overview of how the data are structured and clustered. The data objects are plotted in the cluster- ing order (horizontal axis) together with their respective reachability-distances (vertical axis). The three Gaussian “bumps” in the plot reﬂect three clusters in the data set. Meth- ods have also been developed for viewing clustering structures of high-dimensional data at various levels of detail. The structure of the OPTICS algorithm is very similar to that of DBSCAN. Conse- quently, the two algorithms have the same time complexity. The complexity is O(nlogn) if a spatial index is used, and O(n2) otherwise, where n is the number of objects. 10.4.3 DENCLUE: Clustering Based on Density Distribution Functions Density estimation is a core issue in density-based clustering methods. DENCLUE (DENsity-based CLUstEring) is a clustering method based on a set of density distribu- tion functions. We ﬁrst give some background on density estimation, and then describe the DENCLUE algorithm. In probability and statistics, density estimation is the estimation of an unobservable underlying probability density function based on a set of observed data. In the context of density-based clustering, the unobservable underlying probability density function is the true distribution of the population of all possible objects to be analyzed. The observed data set is regarded as a random sample from that population. 10.4 Density-Based Methods 477 Cluster order of objects Undefined Reachability-distance Figure 10.17 Cluster ordering in OPTICS. Source: Adapted from Ankerst, Breunig, Kriegel, and Sander [ABKS99]. 1 2 Figure 10.18 The subtlety in density estimation in DBSCAN and OPTICS: Increasing the neighborhood radius slightly from ϵ1 to ϵ2 results in a much higher density. In DBSCAN and OPTICS, density is calculated by counting the number of objects in a neighborhood deﬁned by a radius parameter, ϵ. Such density estimates can be highly sensitive to the radius value used. For example, in Figure 10.18, the density changes signiﬁcantly as the radius increases by a small amount. To overcome this problem, kernel density estimation can be used, which is a nonparametric density estimation approach from statistics. The general idea behind kernel density estimation is simple. We treat an observed object as an indicator of 478 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods high-probability density in the surrounding region. The probability density at a point depends on the distances from this point to the observed objects. Formally, let x1,...,xn be an independent and identically distributed sample of a random variable f . The kernel density approximation of the probability density function is ˆfh(x) = 1 nh n X i=1 K x −xi h  , (10.21) where K() is a kernel and h is the bandwidth serving as a smoothing parameter. A ker- nel can be regarded as a function modeling the inﬂuence of a sample point within its neighborhood. Technically, a kernel K() is a non-negative real-valued integrable func- tion that should satisfy two requirements: R +∞ −∞K(u)du = 1 and K(−u) = K(u) for all values of u. A frequently used kernel is a standard Gaussian function with a mean of 0 and a variance of 1: K x −xi h  = 1 √ 2π e−(x −xi)2 2h2 . (10.22) DENCLUE uses a Gaussian kernel to estimate density based on the given set of objects to be clustered. A point x∗is called a density attractor if it is a local maximum of the estimated density function. To avoid trivial local maximum points, DENCLUE uses a noise threshold, ξ, and only considers those density attractors x∗such that ˆf (x∗) ≥ξ. These nontrivial density attractors are the centers of clusters. Objects under analysis are assigned to clusters through density attractors using a step- wise hill-climbing procedure. For an object, x, the hill-climbing procedure starts from x and is guided by the gradient of the estimated density function. That is, the density attractor for x is computed as x0 = x xj+1 = xj + δ ∇ˆf (xj) |∇ˆf (xj)| , (10.23) where δ is a parameter to control the speed of convergence, and ∇ˆf (x) = 1 hd+2nPn i=1 K x −xi h  (xi −x) . (10.24) The hill-climbing procedure stops at step k > 0 if ˆf (xk+1) < ˆf (xk), and assigns x to the density attractor x∗= xk. An object x is an outlier or noise if it converges in the hill- climbing procedure to a local maximum x∗with ˆf (x∗) < ξ. A cluster in DENCLUE is a set of density attractors X and a set of input objects C such that each object in C is assigned to a density attractor in X, and there exists a path between every pair of density attractors where the density is above ξ. By using multiple density attractors connected by paths, DENCLUE can ﬁnd clusters of arbitrary shape. 10.5 Grid-Based Methods 479 DENCLUE has several advantages. It can be regarded as a generalization of several well-known clustering methods such as single-linkage approaches and DBSCAN. More- over, DENCLUE is invariant against noise. The kernel density estimation can effectively reduce the inﬂuence of noise by uniformly distributing noise into the input data. 10.5 Grid-Based Methods The clustering methods discussed so far are data-driven—they partition the set of objects and adapt to the distribution of the objects in the embedding space. Alterna- tively, a grid-based clustering method takes a space-driven approach by partitioning the embedding space into cells independent of the distribution of the input objects. The grid-based clustering approach uses a multiresolution grid data structure. It quantizes the object space into a ﬁnite number of cells that form a grid structure on which all of the operations for clustering are performed. The main advantage of the approach is its fast processing time, which is typically independent of the number of data objects, yet dependent on only the number of cells in each dimension in the quantized space. In this section, we illustrate grid-based clustering using two typical examples. STING (Section 10.5.1) explores statistical information stored in the grid cells. CLIQUE (Section 10.5.2) represents a grid- and density-based approach for subspace clustering in a high-dimensional data space. 10.5.1 STING: STatistical INformation Grid STING is a grid-based multiresolution clustering technique in which the embedding spatial area of the input objects is divided into rectangular cells. The space can be divided in a hierarchical and recursive way. Several levels of such rectangular cells correspond to different levels of resolution and form a hierarchical structure: Each cell at a high level is partitioned to form a number of cells at the next lower level. Statistical information regarding the attributes in each grid cell, such as the mean, maximum, and minimum values, is precomputed and stored as statistical parameters. These statistical parameters are useful for query processing and for other data analysis tasks. Figure 10.19 shows a hierarchical structure for STING clustering. The statistical parameters of higher-level cells can easily be computed from the parameters of the lower-level cells. These parameters include the following: the attribute-independent parameter, count; and the attribute-dependent parameters, mean, stdev (standard devia- tion), min (minimum), max (maximum), and the type of distribution that the attribute value in the cell follows such as normal, uniform, exponential, or none (if the distribu- tion is unknown). Here, the attribute is a selected measure for analysis such as price for house objects. When the data are loaded into the database, the parameters count, mean, stdev, min, and max of the bottom-level cells are calculated directly from the data. The value of distribution may either be assigned by the user if the distribution type is known 480 Chapter 10 Cluster Analysis: Basic Concepts and Methods (i– 1)st layer First layer ith layer Figure 10.19 Hierarchical structure for STING clustering. beforehand or obtained by hypothesis tests such as the χ2 test. The type of distribution of a higher-level cell can be computed based on the majority of distribution types of its corresponding lower-level cells in conjunction with a threshold ﬁltering process. If the distributions of the lower-level cells disagree with each other and fail the threshold test, the distribution type of the high-level cell is set to none. “How is this statistical information useful for query answering?” The statistical para- meters can be used in a top-down, grid-based manner as follows. First, a layer within the hierarchical structure is determined from which the query-answering process is to start. This layer typically contains a small number of cells. For each cell in the current layer, we compute the conﬁdence interval (or estimated probability range) reﬂecting the cell’s relevancy to the given query. The irrelevant cells are removed from further considera- tion. Processing of the next lower level examines only the remaining relevant cells. This process is repeated until the bottom layer is reached. At this time, if the query speciﬁca- tion is met, the regions of relevant cells that satisfy the query are returned. Otherwise, the data that fall into the relevant cells are retrieved and further processed until they meet the query’s requirements. An interesting property of STING is that it approaches the clustering result of DBSCAN if the granularity approaches 0 (i.e., toward very low-level data). In other words, using the count and cell size information, dense clusters can be identiﬁed approximately using STING. Therefore, STING can also be regarded as a density-based clustering method. “What advantages does STING offer over other clustering methods?” STING offers several advantages: (1) the grid-based computation is query-independent because the statistical information stored in each cell represents the summary information of the data in the grid cell, independent of the query; (2) the grid structure facilitates parallel processing and incremental updating; and (3) the method’s efﬁciency is a major advan- tage: STING goes through the database once to compute the statistical parameters of the cells, and hence the time complexity of generating clusters is O(n), where n is the total number of objects. After generating the hierarchical structure, the query processing time 10.5 Grid-Based Methods 481 is O(g), where g is the total number of grid cells at the lowest level, which is usually much smaller than n. Because STING uses a multiresolution approach to cluster analysis, the quality of STING clustering depends on the granularity of the lowest level of the grid structure. If the granularity is very ﬁne, the cost of processing will increase substantially; however, if the bottom level of the grid structure is too coarse, it may reduce the quality of cluster analysis. Moreover, STING does not consider the spatial relationship between the child- ren and their neighboring cells for construction of a parent cell. As a result, the shapes of the resulting clusters are isothetic, that is, all the cluster boundaries are either hori- zontal or vertical, and no diagonal boundary is detected. This may lower the quality and accuracy of the clusters despite the fast processing time of the technique. 10.5.2 CLIQUE: An Apriori-like Subspace Clustering Method A data object often has tens of attributes, many of which may be irrelevant. The val- ues of attributes may vary considerably.