heading:  Noida: Senior lawyer's family away for Diwali, house burgled 
content: CCTV footage shows two men entering the house NOIDA: The house of a senior lawyer was burgled early on Friday when the family was away in Lucknow to celebrate Diwali with relatives. Abhyudai Srivastava told TOI he had left his Sector 30 house with his wife, child and mother on October 22. "We had decided to stay back in Lucknow till November 4 as there was a wedding in the family. Around 7am on Friday, our neighbour called to inform us that the back door of our house was open. I requested him to visit the house and make a video call. He showed me around and I slowly realised that the burglars had broken the locker and taken away everything, almost," the senior lawyer said. The burglars are believed to have entered the house through the driveway and broken the door to the kids' room. "The CCTV camera installed in my child's room shows two men entering the house around 2.20am. They broke the camera installed near the main gate before that. I suspect an insider's job. They knew that we were away and there was cash and jewellery at home," Srivastava said. Haryana Jammu & Kashmir Haryana Alliance View i Party View Seats: 90 L + W Majority: 46 BJP 50 CONG 35 INLD 1 AAP 0 OTH 4 Leads + Wins : 90 / 90 BJP LEADING Jammu & Kashmir Alliance View i Party View Seats: 90 L + W Majority: 46 JKNC 42 BJP 29 CONG 6 PDP 3 OTH 10 Leads + Wins : 90 / 90 JKNC LEADING Source: PValue The lawyer claimed cash and jewellery worth around Rs 25 lakh had been stolen from the house. "Since there was a wedding in the family, we had taken out jewellery from the bank locker. But we decided to leave some of those at home because of safety concerns. Apart from the jewellery, there was Rs 25,000 in cash," he told TOI from Lucknow. Footage from a camera pointing to the main gate shows one of the men shifting its position to avoid being detected. Another clip shows two men entering a room. Their faces partially covered, the two men head for the cupboards and try to open the doors, but to no avail. They go behind the cupboards and try to pry open the doors again, this time with what appears to be a screwdriver. Successful this time, the burglars rummage through the papers and other items kept inside. After some time, they fill the shoulder bag with things they had kept aside and close the cupboard doors. A case was registered against the unidentified miscreants under sections 457 ( lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night) and 380 (theft in dwelling house, etc) of the IPC


heading:  Man who 'molested' woman lynched by her family in Faridabad 
content: Armed with sticks, rods and axes, the attackers broke the window panes, pulled the duo out and started raining blows on them, accusing the two friends of molesting the woman. (Representative image) Gurugram: A 32-year-old man was lynched by the family members of a woman he had allegedly molested in a Faridabad village on Thursday night. His friend, who, too, was attacked with sticks and iron rods, is battling grievous injuries at a Delhi hospital. Police said that around 11pm on Thursday, Mohit and his friend, Naveen, were drinking in a car when they were surrounded by the family members and relatives of the 28-year-old woman in Bhupani. Armed with sticks, rods and axes, the attackers broke the window panes, pulled the duo out and started raining blows on them, accusing the two friends of molesting the woman. They allegedly kept hitting the two until a police vehicle reached the spot and the cops intervened. An hour earlier, the woman and her family members had visited the local police station to lodge a molestation complaint against Mohit and Naveen. While the police were noting down the complaint, one of the family members got a call from a neighbour that Mohit and Naveen had barged into their house and were threatening other women with dire consequences. "They left the police station in a huff. A police team also rushed behind them, but by the time they reached their house, the two had left. We took the woman to BK Hospital for a medico-legal case and started a search for the two accused," said a police officer. In the meantime, the police got information that the woman's relatives were attacking Mohit and Naveen near Bhupani. When a team reached the spot, the attackers fled, leaving the two bleeding profusely from the head. The two were taken to BK Hospital, where Mohit was declared dead on arrival. Naveen was referred to a Delhi hospital as his condition deteriorated. Mohit, the police said, had a criminal history and several cases were pending against him. After the attack, an FIR was lodged at Bhupani police station against four members of the woman's family under sections 148 (rioting armed with deadly weapon), 149 (every member of unlawful assembly is guilty of offence), 302 (murder), 323 (voluntarily causing hurt) and 427 (mischief) of the IPC. The police said they were trying to find out the others involved in the attack. On Friday, a 20-year-old man was arrested in connection with the lynching. "We are conducting searches at various places for the others. One person has been arrested and remanded in seven days' police custody," an officer said.


heading:  Delhi: 2 steal jewels worth Rs 7 lakh from temple in Pitampura, caught on CCTV 
content: A man and a woman allegedly stole jewels worth around Rs seven lakh from a temple in Pitampura on Monday, police said, adding the incident was caught on camera. NEW DELHI: A man and a woman allegedly stole jewels worth around Rs seven lakh from a temple in Pitampura on Monday, police said, adding the incident was caught on camera. The incident was reported at the PU block in the Pitampura area. "In the morning, the priest of the temple found out about the burglary and informed other people," police said. In the CCTV footage, the alleged burglars can be seen barging into the temple and taking away the jewellery. A bearded man enters the temple and takes the jewellery off an idol and then a woman reaches the spot, it shows. According to locals, nothing similar has happened at the temple in the past. "The temple is more than 40 years old and this is the first time that such an incident has happened," said Ashwani Vats, a resident of Pitampura. A case has been registered under relevant IPC sections and a probe is on, police said.


heading:  Chennai: Three held for performing stunts in train 
content: Image used for representative purpose only CHENNAI: A day after seven youth performed stunts in a moving train with machetes in their hands, three of them, including two juveniles, were arrested on Monday. A video of a gang of men, hanging on the footboard of a moving train went viral as two of them were seen wielding machetes from the fast-paced train. Meanwhile, two other were sliding on the platform yelling and praising Presidency College. The incident left the public alarmed and some worried after the group banged the machete on the train's coach. With the help of the video, police launched a hunt and found them to be students of Presidency college. Korrukupet railway police registered cases under four sections of IPC. The railway officials said that those indulging in any such acts are liable to undergo stringent action.


heading:  Man held for stabbing wife in Chennai 
content: Image used for representative purpose only CHENNAI: Ayanavaram police arrested a 20-year-old man on the charges of attacking his wife with a knife for uploading videos on social media with other men. According to police, the couple often fought over her uploading duet videos with other stranger men on social media.The man, identified as Solomon, 20, of NMK Street at Ayanavaram, got married to Easwari over a year ago. The couple quarelled often as Easwari uploaded videos of her performing to songs with other men. Meanwhile, on Monday night, Solomon, who came home drunk, picked up an argument with Easwari. In a fit of rage, Solomon stabbed her with a knife and fled from the spot. Neighbours who heard her scream, rushed Easwari to the Government Kilpauk Medical College (KMC) hospital for treatment. Based on a complaint, the police nabbed Solomon from a hideout and arrested him on Tuesday. An inquiry is on. After conducting investigation, he was remanded in judicial custody on Tuesday night.


heading:  Thane: Police find body of auto driver with his throat slit 
content: Image used for representational purpose only THANE: Mumbra police have recovered a body of a man with throat slit from the bushes in Ambedkar nagar area. The deceased has been identified as Faijan Memon , an auto driver. According to his wife it was on Monday when he left for a party with his friend but never returned. The cops have booked the accused for murder and have launched a manhunt to nab him. “It is suspected that the absconding accused in the case had blamed the deceased for robbing mobile phone, that could have led to murder. Further investigation has been launched. CCTVs leading to the crime spot are also getting scanned for further leads in the case,” said a police officer from Mumbra police station.


heading:  Rajasthan: Youth abducted from Churu rescued by Sikar cops, 2 held 
content: Image used for representational purpose JAIPUR: A youth kidnapped from Lal Ghantaghar area of Churu district in the early hours of Wednesday was rescued by Nechwa police of Sikar district. Police said inter-district coordination, community policing and giving point-to-point details of the movement of kidnappers to various villages helped them to rescue the youth and arrest the two accused. Arvind (24) was returning home late on Tuesday when two assailants came on a jeep, pushed him into it and kidnapped him. Soon after, the locals intimated the police control room about the incident and an alarm was raised with the district police barricading and intensified patrolling. "We were sharing the details of the movement of the kidnappers who were fleeing towards Sikar district. We shared the details with Sikar police and they also took all our inputs seriously," said a senior police officer of Churu. The kidnappers were moving towards Churu-Salawar area in the early hours of Wednesday and suddenly stopped the vehicle near Ganeri village. "After we got their specific location, we asked our informers and others in the village to surround the kidnappers until our team reached the spot. The kidnappers left the youth at a farm and also concealed themselves in the farm. Finally, our team reached and rescued the kidnapped boy and also arrested the two kidnappers," said an officer of Nechwa police station. The two arrested were identified as Ram Gopal and Harish Bishnoi. "We have handed over the rescued youth and the kidnappers to Churu police," the officer added. Churu police have found that it was a clear case of kidnap for ransom.


heading:  Rasgulla not served at wedding, guests stab each other, 1 dead in Agra 
content: People used spoons, sharp-edged objects to attack each other at the reception in Etmadpur ALIGARH: A 20-year-old man was stabbed to death and several others injured when a fight broke out over rasgullas at a wedding reception in Agra district on Wednesday night. A video of the fight has gone viral on social media. SHO of Etmadpur , Sarvesh Kumar, on Thursday, said, "Usman Ahmed's two daughters were getting married to Wakar Ahmed's sons... An argument erupted between the families over 'rasgullas' not being served. Things turned ugly when youngsters from both sides started throwing plates and chairs at each other. They also used spoons and sharp-edged objects to attack the other side." The incident took place at a banquet hall in Etmadpur. The victim, Sanni, was stabbed in the ensuing melee. He was rushed to a local hospital where doctors declared him "brought dead". At least a dozen guests, with stab wounds and bruises, were shifted to the hospital. SHO Kumar added: "An FIR under IPC section 302 (murder) has been registered following a police complaint filed by the victim's uncle. The victim belonged to Khandauli. Several persons involved in the brawl have been detained." One of the members from the bride's side said that people were having food and enjoying themselves when all of a sudden due to an argument over a trivial matter, things went out of hand, resulting in the death of a young guest and ruining the entire happy occasion. SP (rural) Satyajeet Gupta said, "The matter is being investigated. A case of murder has been registered. We are now collecting more information from the venue."


heading:  Mumbai: 10-year rigorous imprisonment for rapist even as girl dies before deposition 
content: The accused was the child's neighbour. (Representative image) MUMBAI: Sentencing the rapist of an 8-year-old girl to 10-year RI, a city Posco court said the victim's mother should be awarded compensation by the District Legal Services Authority, Mumbai, under the victim compensation scheme as per rule. "The victim is not alive due to her illness... Hence, there is no rehabilitation to be done. The mother of the victim, who has gone through the pain of losing a child due to illness and has also seen the child subjected to penetrative sexual assault, should be granted compensation by the state," the court said. It also fined the accused Rs 26,000. The accused was the child's neighbour. The mother told the court on March 28, 2019, at about 5.30pm, she noticed blood in her 8-year-old daughter's urine. The mother further said when she enquired with the child, she was told that on March 20, 2019, at about 3pm when she was playing with children in the house of the accused, he caught her from behind the curtain and sexually assaulted her. The child also told the mother he threatened her and told her not to disclose the incident to anyone. The mother said she took the child to the local doctor who recommended they go to KEM Hospital for further medical examination and treatment. The child was taken there the following day. On March 30, 2019, an FIR was lodged and the accused was arrested. The accused claimed that he was falsely implicated due to an old quarrel. The court, however, said the child's death cannot be grounds to give any benefit of doubt to the accused. "The mother of the deceased child has proved the complaint and the FIR which is lodged from the incident learnt by her from the child... The privacy of the girl child in respect of her private part will not be exposed by a mother for quarrels with a neighbour. No mother will make allegations that touch the modesty of a girl as it is not a matter of pride for any child and the family," the court said. (The victim's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme Court directives on cases related to sexual assault)


heading:  Mumbai: Senior citizen among 2 killed in hit-and-run accidents in Borivli West 
content: MHB Colony police have registered cases of rash driving and negligence. (Representative image) MUMBAI: Two women, one of them a senior citizen, lost their lives in separate incidents of hit-and-run in Borivli West. Both crashes involve truckers who are on the run. MHB Colony police have registered cases of rash driving and negligence. The first crash occurred on Borivli Link Road on October 25. Jyoti Kanojia, who ran a laundry business and was seated pillion with her husband and daughter on a two wheeler, was killed in the crash. Jyoti's husband, Sanjay, told the police that the family had decided to go on a holiday with their relatives to a resort at Naigaon and were excited about the trip. Sanjay, an electrician, in his statement to the police said, "Two of my brothers and their families arrived at our home in Eksar, Borivli, around 9 am on Tuesday. We all set out in our vehicles." Sanjay was riding a scooter with Jyoti and daughter, Lavanya, 11, seated pillion. The couple's son, Meet, 13, was travelling in one of their relatives' vehicles. "My brothers went ahead. I had reached Ganpat Patil Nagar on New Link Road around 9.15 am when a goods truck came up from right. The truck was speeding. I was careful and kept to the left. But suddenly a two wheeler came up from inside a gully of Ganpat Patil Nagar, perpendicular to my vehicle. I slammed the brakes. My bike skidded and all three of us were thrown off. My daughter and I landed on the road, while my wife was moved down by the rear wheel of the truck," said Sanjay. The trucker fled without helping Jyoti. Sanjay hailed a cab and rushed her to Lotus Hospital where doctors suggested that she be moved to Babasaheb Ambedkar Hospital at Kandivli. Sanjay called up his brothers and organised an ambulance. But Jyoti was pronounced dead at Ambedkar Hospital. In another crash, an 86-year-old woman headed to the temple was knocked down by a garbage truck at Borivli on Wednesday. Ambaben Shah's morning routine consisted of going to the temple and feeding cattle. Around 7 am, she was crossing the road when the truck driver ran her over. Bystanders rushed her to the Lotus hospital and subsequently to the Babasaheb Ambedkar Hospital where she was pronounced dead. The garbage truck driver fled without helping her.


heading:  Mumbai: Kidnapped baby found within 24 hours of crime, couple held 
content: CP Vivek Phansalkar hands over the baby to her parents on Thursday MUMBAI: Less than 24 hours after a 71-day-old baby girl was kidnapped from a footpath, city police arrested a couple for the crime and rescued the infant. The baby had been kidnapped from a footpath near St Xavier's High School in Fort on Tuesday night when her pavement dweller parents were asleep. Police suspect the couple had kidnapped the baby with the intent to sell her. "We formed eight police teams and traced the accused within 12 hours of registration of the complaint," said city police commissioner Vivek Phansalkar on Thursday while briefing mediapersons about the detection and handing over the baby to her parents. You Can Also Check: Mumbai AQI | Weather in Mumbai | Gold Rate Today in Mumbai | Silver Rate Today in Mumbai Baby Alisha's father Chakram Shekhar (35), who does odd jobs for a living, touched Phansalkar's feet and thanked him with tears in his eyes. Manisha Shekhar (30), the mother, was over the moon. Alisha is the youngest among three siblings. When her parents woke up at midnight, they couldn't find her and launched a search. The family then approached Azad Maidan police station and an FIR for kidnapping was registered. "Teams comprising personnel from Azad Maidan, L T Marg, Pydhonie, J J Marg and Dongri police stations were formed to investigate the case," said Phansalkar. "We suspect the accused are not operating alone. We are investigating the case," he added. A Dongri police station team led by senior police inspector Shabana Shaikh nabbed the accused at Bharni Naka in Antop Hill. PSI Waseem Qadir Patel and staff of Dongri police apprehended the accused, Haneef Memon (46) and his wife Afreen (39), residents of Shanti Nagar in Wadala. The accused couple have a 13-year-old daughter and a nine-year-old son. "While analysing the CCTV footage we got a clear image of Haneef Memon kidnapping the baby and head to CSMT railway station. He boarded a train and got down at Wadala. From there, he took a taxi but we couldn't find the taxi's exact route. We activated all our informants and scanned over a hundred CCTV cameras," said an officer. Afreen was not with him at the time of kidnapping. She was arrested after her role emerged in the crime during interrogation. It was an informant who alerted the police on Wednesday evening about Memon being seen walking on a footpath at Bharni Naka along with his son, wife and the kidnapped baby. A police probe team, which was in the Wadala area, arrived at the spot quickly. The cops first took custody of the baby and then detained Memon and his wife. Bhushan Belnekar, senior police inspector, Azad Maidan police station, said the accused were remanded in police custody till November 3. The Memons lived in Mira Road before shifting to central Mumbai. A police source said Haneef used to sell pesticides in south Mumbai and knew the locality from where he kidnapped the child. "A few hours before kidnapping the baby, Memon did a recce of the area," said a cop. Inspector Pravin Pawle of Azad Maidan police station is investigating the case.


heading:  Madhya Pradesh man lays electric wire to kill wife but mother-in-law gets electrocuted 
content: Representative image BETUL: A man in Madhya Pradesh's Betul district laid an electric wire on an iron door to allegedly kill his wife, but his 55-year-old mother-in-law came in contact with the door and died of electrocution, police said on Tuesday. The incident took place in Saikheda village under Kotwali police station limits on Monday. The man was a habitual drinker and this often led to quarrels with his wife, Kotwali police station in-charge Apaala Singh said. On Sunday night, the couple again had a fight over the issue after which the wife went to her mother's home, the official said. Singh said an initial investigation revealed the man, angry over his wife leaving home, went to his in-laws' house where he connected the main entry door made of iron with an electric wire to allegedly kill his wife. But, his mother-in-law came in contact with the door and died on the spot, the official said. After the incident, the man fled from the spot, the police said, adding that efforts were on to nab him. A case was registered against the absconding accused under relevant provisions, the police added.


heading:  Kolkata: Cyber crooks target flyers, cancel tickets hours before flight take-off 
content: Ahishek Paul, his wife Nidhi and daughter Aaditri whose tickets got cancelled KOLKATA: Four flyers - three of them from one family and another travelling individually - have approached the cyber-crime department of Kolkata Police to report the mysterious cancellation of their flight tickets at the eleventh hour without their knowledge despite them having checked-in through the Internet and getting boarding cards issued. TOI had reported one of the passenger's ordeal in the October 9 edition. The airline on which the passengers were booked as well as the travel portal through which the bookings were made have denied a role in the cancellation. The IP address of the computer from where the cancellations were done is in Kolkata. TOI tried to reach out to both IndiGo and MakeMyTrip for comments but did not receive any response to queries on the issue from either. According to bank employee Abhishek Paul, who was travelling with wife Nidhi, daughter Aaditri and two other families comprising seven people booked on another PNR, it was only when he produced the boarding passes at the check-in counter to get the luggage tags that the airline ground staff told him that three tickets had been cancelled. "We along with two families had booked a trip to Rishikesh. While seven persons were booked on one PNR, we three had a separate PNR. The flight tickets were done three months ago. Around 48 hours prior to the flight departure, we did the web check-in and downloaded the boarding passes. We even received a message from the airline, urging us to report to the airport early due to rush. On Saturday, we reached Terminal 2 at Delhi airport around 3.30pm for IndiGo flight 6E 2057 that was scheduled to depart at 6.40pm. It is after those booked on one PNR had deposited their luggage that we learnt about the cancellation," recounted Paul. TOI had on Saturday reported how former British Council eastern India director and current CEO of Future Hope, Sujata Sen, had encountered the same issue. She, too, was travelling by the same flight. Perplexed by the information, Paul demanded to know who had cancelled the tickets. The airline staff pointed the finger at the travel portal. When Paul called Make My Trip, the executive at the other end said the ticketing display showed the PNR was still live and had not been cancelled. The airline staff insisted the tickets were cancelled and said the IP address from where the cancellations had been done around three hours earlier was in Kolkata. "Following this, I had to purchase fresh tickets for three on a flight via Pune that cost me Rs 51,000. The original tickets were for Rs 26,000. Not just that, we were to reach Kolkata at 8.45pm on Saturday. Instead, we finally landed around 7am on Sunday. A perfect holiday had turned into a nightmare," he pointed out. While Sujata Sen has written to the Cyber PS and sent a copy of the complaint to the Kolkata Police joint CP (crime), Paul has spoken to cops in the Cyber PS and will hand over a written complaint at Lalbazar on Tuesday. These are not the only instances of passengers finding themselves in such a situation. Narayan Banerjee, a senior executive of a firm that manufactures equipment for the tea processing industry, said he had faced a similar experience while returning to Kolkata from Delhi in August 2022.


heading:  Police rescue infant kidnapped from Mumbai, couple held 
content: Image used for representational purpose MUMBAI: Mumbai Police have rescued a two-month-old girl who was allegedly kidnapped two days back from south Mumbai and arrested a couple in this connection, a senior official said on Thursday. The accused allegedly wanted to sell the child, he said, adding that police suspect the couple might have been involved in more cases of child kidnappings. A 30-year-old woman living on a footpath in L T Marg area of south Mumbai approached police late Tuesday night saying her 71-day-old daughter was missing. The Azad Maidan police registered a case under Indian Penal Code 363 (kidnapping) and formed eight teams to find the baby, Police Commissioner Vivek Phansalkar told reporters. The police examined footage of a number of CCTVs. The 46-year-old male accused was seen with the baby in the CCTV footage of south Mumbai and Wadala areas, a police official said. The police later traced the man and rescued the child, he said. The man and his wife were arrested, the official said, adding that the couple was planning to sell the child.


heading:  Newborn girl dies due to overheating of warmer in Rajasthan hospital 
content: Image used for representational purpose JAIPUR: A newborn girl has died due to overheating of a warmer at the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) of a government hospital in Rajasthan's Bhilwara district, officials said on Thursday. The incident occurred on Wednesday in the Mother and Child Hospital of the Mahatma Gandhi Government Hospital where another baby was also injured. "The services of two contractual nursing staffers who were on duty in the NICU have been terminated with immediate effect and an inquiry committee has been formed," a hospital official said. The baby who died was 21-day old. Being underweight she was admitted to the NICU on October 5. She was kept in the warmer on Tuesday night and died in the early hours of Wednesday. Her family members created a ruckus over the death following which action against contractual employees was taken and the inquiry committee was formed. "Based on the report of the committee, further action will be taken," the official said.


heading:  UP: Man hangs self in hotel, note says hand over body to hospital 
content: Representative image LUCKNOW: A 28-year-old call centre employee from Kanpur was found hanging in a hotel room in Naka on Tuesday. Police found a note, purportedly written by the man, in which he stated that his body should be handed over to SGPGI . Identified as Ashish Kumar, the man checked into the hotel on Monday night. The hotel staff went to check when he did not come out of the room till Tuesday evening and when the knocks went unanswered, they peeped through a window and spotted him hanging. The staff then informed the police. Station house officer, Naka police station, Brijesh Dwivedi said, “Police broke the door and sent the body for autopsy. The circumstantial evidence suggested that Kumar had shifted the bed to one side and then climbed a chair to hang himself on the ceiling fan with a noose made of a bed sheet.” “The post-mortem examination revealed the cause of death as asphyxiation due to hanging. Kumar’s father confirmed that the hand writing on the note was of his son. The note stated that no one else is responsible for his death and that his body should not be given to the family and instead be handed over to the SGPGI”, he added. Police said that last year an elderly couple had committed suicide in the city and left behind a similar request.


heading:  Kolkata: Woman duped of Rs 1 lakh in e-fraud 
content: Representative image KOLKATA: A resident of east Kolkata ended up losing Rs 1 lakh while trying to track her food through a popular food delivery app during the festive season a few days ago. The customer care number of the eatery she had called up turned out to be fake. The complainant, Chandraboli Chakraborty (35), said she was trying to track her order so that she could complete her payment formalities. "Whenever I tried using the app, it showed an error. Hence, I decided to call the food outlet. I came across a number through Google search and called up. The person asked me to share my card details for an advance payment. I followed as directed but soon realized that I had lost close to Rs 1 lakh from my two accounts," she said in her complaint. The Bidhannagar Police's cyber cell is investigating the case after lodging a case of fraud.


heading:  Lucknow: FIR after man sends obscene messages 
content: Image used for representative purpose only LUCKNOW: An acquaintance of a woman allegedly sent her obscene messages on WhatsApp and threatened her of dire consequences when she blocked the number. However, a case has been registered in connection with the incident reported from Aashiana area. The woman received a missed call on October 7 night, when she was at her parents’ house. She reverted, hoping that it would be from someone in her acquaintance and found that the call was made by one Dharmveer from her in-laws’ side. ADCP, East Zone , Syed Ali Abbas said an FIR has been registered .


heading:  Karnataka: Woman's body found in unused well in Padubidri 
content: Image used for representative purpose only UDUPI: A 24- year-old woman was found dead in an unused well under mysterious circumstances, in Padubidri police station limits, on Saturday. The deceased is Rakshitha. According to a complaint filed by her aunt, Rakshitha, who was working in a fancy store in Kaup, had eloped with Sanjay about two years ago. When her mother was unwell, she returned home and stayed with her parents. On October 3, Sanjay and three women working in the fancy store visited her aunt, and allegedly spoke ill about Rakshitha's character and left her in her aunt's house. After some time, Rakshitha complained of chest pain and returned to her house. Her aunt and uncle, who wanted to check how she was doing, visited her house to find the house locked. When they called her husband, he said, that she may have gone out with someone. However, on Saturday, she was found dead in an unused well. A case in this regard has been registered.


heading:  Delhi: Brothers held in separate abduction and rape cases 
content: Image used for representational purpose only NEW DELHI: Delhi Police has arrested two brothers in separate cases of kidnapping and rape. The accused in the kidnapping case jumped bail in 2020, while his brother allegedly raped a woman last year. The men, residents of Gautam Budh Nagar in Uttar Pradesh, have been identified as Ashish Chauhan (27), the accused in the kidnapping case, and Deepak Chauhan (23), police said. According to the cops, Ashish, along with his associates Vivek, Rohit, Vinod and Sunil, kidnapped a person in a car at gunpoint from GT Karnal Road near Singhu Village on August 29, 2017 and demanded a ransom of Rs 3 crore. “A police team from the Alipur police station managed to track the suspects and a brief shootout followed, in which one of the suspects, Aryan, was injured. Both Ashish and Aryan were caught. Ashish got bail on November 3, 2020, and jumped it, becoming an absconder. A non-bailable warrant was issued against him,” an officer said. Deepak was arrested in the alleged rape case of July 2021, which was registered in the Noida Sector 39 police station. He used to work at a call centre in Noida and met the woman there, the officer said. He had fled after the alleged crime. Ashish gave details of his brother’s whereabouts during the questioning and the latter was arrested, claimed police.


heading:  Gurugram: Farmer shot at by his nephew & two others over property feud in Sohna 
content: The three fled as villagers gathered in the area, and Vinender was rushed to the Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi. (Representative image) GURUGRAM : A 46-year-old farmer was injured after his nephew and two others allegedly burst a gandhak potash gun (a pipe filled with gunpowder, normally used to keep birds away from fields) in his mouth and then shot at him over a property dispute in Sohna on Sunday, police said. The condition of the farmer Vinender Kumar , who is admitted to a Delhi hospital, is critical, they said on Tuesday. Two of the accused — nephew Jitender Kumar (20) and one of his accomplices — have been arrested. Another aide is on the run. According to the farmer’s sister, Anita Devi , the incident took place around 8pm, when Vinender was at his field in Lakhuwas village. She said in her complaint that Jitender and two of his aides went to the field, where the accused overpowered him and burst the pipe filled with gunpowder in his mouth. After that, she alleged, Jitender shot him in the stomach with a gun. The three fled as villagers gathered in the area, and Vinender was rushed to the Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi. “Prima facie, it looks like a dispute over property. The victim is not fit for a statement. We have so far nabbed two, including the nephew of the victim. We are investigating the matter,” said Umesh Kumar , SHO, Sohna police station. The accused have been booked under sections 148 (rioting), 149 (unlawful assembly), 323 (causing hurt), 307 (attempt to murder) of the IPC, and relevant sections of the Arms Act.


heading:  Uttar Pradesh: Ex-Armyman kills son for trying to mediate 'fight' with his wife in Hathras 
content: The incident occurred in Ghuncha village under the Sadabad police station. (Representative image) ALIGARH: A 21-year-old man, who was preparing to join the Army, was allegedly killed by his father, an ex-Armyman, in Hathras district. Police said on Tuesday that the young man tried to mediate between his parents during a heated exchange when his enraged father shot his son from a licensed rifle. The victim's mother filed a police complaint on Monday and the accused has been booked for murder. The incident occurred in Ghuncha village under the Sadabad police station. There were also reports that the accused father with some villagers had quickly cremated his son's body without informing the police. The cops later collected the remains from the pyre and sent it for postmortem. SHO of Sadabaad, Asish Kumar Singh, said, "The accused has been arrested and the weapon recovered from his possession. Further investigation is on. Action will be taken accordingly."


heading:  Uttar Pradesh: Cop kills dad for not allowing him to marry girlfriend in Baghpat 
content: The matter came to light when the constable's mother, filed a missing persons complaint on October 17 after her husband did not return home. (Representative image) MEERUT: A 25-year-old Uttar Pradesh police constable allegedly killed his father in Shabka village of UP's Baghpat district on October 16 for not "agreeing to his plans to marry his 23-year-old girlfriend". Station officer of Chhaprauli police station, inspector Nitin Pandey, said, "Accused Gaurav Kumar, posted in Unnao, was arrested after he confessed to the crime during investigation. A case has been registered against him under IPC section 304 (culpable homicide) following a complaint by his mother." The matter came to light when the constable's mother, Vimla Devi, filed a missing persons complaint on October 17 after her husband, Sudesh Pal, 52, did not return home. During preliminary investigation, it was found that the accused cop, absent from his duty for the past several months, had a tiff with his father over marrying his girlfriend, said Pandey. "Kumar stuck his father on his head with an iron rod after a heated argument and he died on the spot. Then he packed the body in a sack and dumped it in a sugarcane field on the outskirts of the village. We found the victim's body on October 18," added Pandey.


heading:  Uttar Pradesh: Army jawan on Diwali leave shot dead by lover's hubby in Aligarh, 8 men booked 
content: Victim Bikan Kumar (in pic) was selected to the Indian Army in 2017 and was posted in Hoshiarpur ALIGARH: A 24-year-old Army jawan, who had recently come home from his posting in Punjab to celebrate Diwali, was allegedly attacked and shot dead by his lover's husband and seven others near Aligarh in UP. The victim, Bikan Kumar, and his uncle were on their way to Aligarh in their car on Sunday night when they were attacked with sticks and sharp objects by eight men, and then shot dead the jawan, police said on Tuesday. The incident took place at Rasoolpur village under the Tappal police limits. Kumar's father, Janata Singh, said, "My son and wife of one of the accused were in a relationship. He was killed by her husband, Vijaypal, his brother Bablu and six other members of their family." A case has been registered at Tappal police station under IPC section 302 (murder). Three accused have been arrested so far, police said, adding that Vijaypal is still at large. SSP Kalanidhi Naithani said, "The man was killed by one Vijaypal over a relationship with the latter's wife. Eight people have been booked, of which three have been nabbed." Kumar's brother Premveer Singh said, "He (Bikan Kumar) was selected in the Indian Army in 2017 and was posted in Hoshiarpur. When he left home with my uncle and others, some villagers attacked his car and shot him in the head. He was taken to hospital where he was declared dead." The jawan was cremated with full state honours in his village on Tuesday morning.


heading:  Uttarakhand: UP man shot dead after argument over crackers in Rudrapur 
content: Image used for representational purpose Rudrapur: A 23-year-old man from Uttar Pradesh was shot dead after an argument over bursting firecrackers during Diwali celebrations in Rudrapur on Monday night, police said on Tuesday. Daljeet Singh, a resident of Bilaspur town, was killed allegedly by Gurveer Singh of Metropolis Colony with his licensed revolver. Police said Daljeet, who had come to a relative's house in Metropolis Colony to celebrate Diwali, was bursting firecrackers, when one landed in Gurveer's flat, triggering a heated argument. Neighbours intervened and pacified them. But at around 1:30 am, when Daljeet was returning to Bilaspur, Gurveer and his aides allegedly stopped and beat him brutally and Gurveer fired on Daljeet's stomach with his licensed revolver. SP (city) Manoj Katyal said police have CCTV footage of the incident and all the accused have been identified. "We have detained one man and others absconding will be nabbed soon."


heading:  Uttar Pradesh: Throat slit by robbers, dying man cries for help as passersby take videos in Lakhimpur Kheri 
content: An onlooker can also be heard asking Verma to type the killer's names on a mobile. (Representative image) BAREILLY: A 25-year-old man, Vinay Verma, who took out Rs 1 lakh from his shop on Diwali eve, was robbed by unidentified miscreants who then slit his throat and left him to die. In shocking videos that have surfaced on social media a few hours after the crime, Verma can be seen lying on the road in a pool of blood, writhing in pain and crying for help as bystanders film the dying man. In another viral clip shared by a social media user, Verma can be seen gasping for breath even as some bystanders ask him to name his "killers" while others continue to make videos. An onlooker can also be heard asking Verma to type the killer's names on a mobile. Police arrived later and took Verma to a local hospital where he succumbed. Doctors said that the man's life could have been saved had he been brought sooner. The incident took place in Lakhimpur Kheri , police said on Tuesday. SHO at Fardhan police station , Anil Saini, said, "The man was supposed to meet his friend when he was attacked by unidentified miscreants. We are finding out if there are any witnesses to the crime. The victim died before he could record his statement. We are questioning a few suspects." A resident of Gumchini village in Fardhan area, Verma, the only son of his parents, was looking after the family business after the death of his father. He got married two years ago and his wife is four months pregnant.


heading:  Shots fired after tiff over crackers, 4 hurt in Delhi's Keshavpuram 
content: Police analysed CCTV footage, arrested the accused and seized the illegal automatic pistol along with a live cartridge. (Representative image) NEW DELHI: Four people received bullet injuries after an argument over the bursting of firecrackers in northwest Delhi's Keshavpuram. The accused has been arrested. The three of a family, including a woman, were hurt in the incident, police said, adding the fourth injured person was their neighbour. On Monday night, the PCR received a call regarding firing in Keshavpuram. A team from the local police station reached the spot and the four injured people were taken to a hospital. DCP (Northwest) Usha Rangnani said the accused, 41-year-old Arvind, was at his house when he heard the sound of crackers. "He got irritated by the noise and came out and confronted those lighting the crackers, which led to an argument. This soon turned into a scuffle," police said. Arvind then fired gunshots and four people, Manju Jain, Shubham Jain, Ankur Jain and Dalmeet Singh, got injured. Police analysed CCTV footage, arrested the accused and seized the illegal automatic pistol along with a live cartridge. Two empty cartridges were recovered from the spot. A case under IPC sections 323 (voluntarily causing hurt) and 307 (attempt to murder) and sections 25, 27 of Arms Act was registered.


heading:  Woman dies by suicide in Gurugram; family alleges dowry harassment 
content: Image used for representative purpose only. GURUGRAM: A 46-year-old woman allegedly hanged herself at her house at a housing society in Sector-51 here, police said on Tuesday, with her family members alleging that she was killed over dowry. On October 22, a private hospital informed the Sector-50 police station that a dead woman had been brought to the facility and she had died due to hanging, they said. Police said that a team reached the hospital and she was identified as Manisha Chauhan. On a complaint from the woman's brother Aakash Chauhan, a case has been registered at the police station against her husband and mother-in-law, they said. The case has been registered under Indian Penal Code sections 304B (whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment) and 34 (criminal act done by several persons in furtherance of common intention), police said, adding that she had married Shailesh Vikram Singh, a resident Nirvana Country housing society, on June 20, 2017. The woman had returned to Nirvana Country from her maternal house on October 22, according to police. While her mother-in-law and husband have alleged suicide, her brother has accused them of killing her over dowry, they said. Station House Officer Sector-50 Inspector Rajesh Kumar said based on the complaint, "we have registered an FIR". "We are verifying the facts and action will be taken as per the law. The main accused and husband of the deceased is reportedly the CEO of a Delhi-based private company," the officer said. In his complaint, Aakash Chauhan said, "My sister was not happy as they (in-laws) were demanding Rs 20 lakh cash and a Fortuner car." "Due to this, she had come to our home. Her husband brought her (back to Nirvana Country) citing Diwali but killed her," he said. Police said the matter is being investigated and no one has been arrested yet. Stay updated with the latest news on Times of India . Don't miss daily games like Crossword , Sudoku , and Mini Crossword .


heading:  Cleric arrested for sodomising 11-year-old at northeast Delhi madrassa 
content: A probe is on to find out if the accused targeted other children too. (Representative image) NEW DELHI: A 24-year-old cleric at a mosque in northeast Delhi has been arrested for allegedly sexually assaulting a minor boy. Police said the 11-year-old boy lived with his family in Haryana and was studying at the madrassa for the last four years. He had recently become hesitant about going there. A probe is on to find out if the accused targeted other children too. On Thursday, the boy’s mother approached cops at Karawal Nagar police station claiming that her child was sodomised by the cleric. On October 7, after the Eid holidays, when she tried to take her son to the madrassa, he said he wasn’t willing to study there anymore. On October 11, he left the madrassa, reached home and disclosed about the assault by cleric Maulana Mohammad Javed. DCP (Northeast) Sanjay Sain said, “A case of unnatural sex and under sections of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act was registered and the accused was arrested. He has confessed to the crime. He revealed that he was married. He lived with his wife and daughter in the accommodation provided within the mosque complex.” The boy told police that he used to stay on the third floor with 15-20 students in the accommodation provided at the madrassa. The cleric had been teaching there since March 2021. On August 14, while preparations were on for Independence Day, Javed allegedly called the boy to his room and sodomised him. He threatened the child of dire consequences if he disclosed the assault to anyone. It was claimed that he assaulted the boy on many occasions.


heading:  Kolkata: Man assaulted for 'cattle theft' in Howrah 
content: The mini-truck that was set on fire by the mob in Howrah HOWRAH: Locals severely assaulted a suspected cattle thief, injured three police officers and set a mini-truck on fire in Howrah 's Domjur on Sunday morning. Cops rescued the 29-year-old and later arrested six persons in connection with this incident. Locals claimed that they were trying to stop cattle smuggling in the area. The assaulted man, Sheikh Ezhar, a resident of Pilkhana in Howrah, was admitted to a Howrah hospital where his condition was stated to be critical. Cops could not question him because of his serious condition. However, cops said Ezhar had reportedly confessed to having stolen the cattle from villagers. "This is being corroborated as he is still in a state of trauma," said an officer. The three policemen who suffered minor injuries were discharged from the hospital. A police picket was put up in the area and more raids were being conducted till this report was filed. The incident took place around 4am at Pakuria in Domjur. Some locals who were guarding the village noticed that the mini-truck was parked there with four masked men and an ox. On being asked about the matter, three of them fled while Ezhar was caught red-handed, tied to a lamp post and beaten up severely. As cops tried to rescue Ezhar, the locals allegedly attacked them. Later, they set the mini-truck on fire. Ashok Saha, a local, said, "In the recent past several cases of cattle thefts have happened. So, we arranged surveillance by ourselves every night."


heading:  West Bengal: Bike gang shoots at Bhatpara man 
content: Police are looking for the culprits. (Representative image) KOLKATA: A gang of bike-borne goons shot at a 34-year-old man near a Kali Puja pandal in Bhatpara on Monday morning. One of the bullets hit the victim, Raj Pandey, in his right arm. Pandey, a close relative of local Trinamool councillor Manoj Pandey, was admitted to Bhatpara State General Hospital. Later he was shifted to a private hospital in Kolkata. Police are looking for the culprits. According to local sources, Pandey, a resident of Bhatpara's Teen Sutia, was chatting with his friends when three miscreants wearing helmets came on a motorbike and stopped in front of the pandal. One of them fired twice at Pandey and the gang fled the spot. Councillor Manoj Pandey said: "Some miscreants are trying to disturb peace in our area."An officer of Barrackpore commissionerate said: "Primarily, we suspect that an old rivalry could have led to the shooting. Probe is on."


heading:  Chhattisgarh: Maoists murder villager; 2nd such killing this month 
content: Representative image RAIPUR : Maoists murdered a 32-year-old farmer in his fields in the newly formed Mohla-Manpur-Ambagarh Chowki (MMAC) district of Chhattisgarh on Tuesday. It's not yet known why the insurgents killed Manjit Toppo but there are witnesses who saw him being dragged away by an armed band of Maoists, said police. His body had a bullet wound and a blow to the head with an axe. There was no Maoist leaflet found at the location. MMAC district was carved out of Rajnandgaon district last month. Police said Toppo was killed in Ghotiyakanhar village in the insurgency-hit Aundhi region, less than 3km from the Maharashtra border and 280km east of Raipur. Locals alerted police that a group of armed Maoists had abducted Toppo, who lived in Tukam village. They shot and hacked him, killing him on the spot. People of another village saw the body lying in a deserted area and informed police, who retrieved it and sent it for autopsy. The Maoists haven't claimed responsibility for the murder yet but locals said that Toppo had received threats from the insurgents who suspected him of working as a police informer. This is the second such Maoist killing in the district this month. On October 14, a police constable's father, 55-year-old Ravindra Sai, was stabbed and shot dead in Kohka region.


heading:  Noida: Murder to robbery, traffic cameras help cops solve crime 
content: Police said the high-technology cameras installed at 82 locations as part of the project are an additional means to locate criminals and offenders NOIDA: The Integrated Security and Traffic Management System ( ISTMS ) has assisted police in solving 104 crimes - 29 robberies, 26 snatchings, 26 hit and run cases, one murder, 22 missing persons, vehicle theft and other cases - from May to September this year. Police said the high-tech cameras installed at 82 locations as part of the project are an additional means to locate criminals and offenders. "There are facilities in the system to locate any particular vehicle passing by the cameras by just feeding its registration number. There is also a face recognition facility in the system. Besides crime, the technology is commuter friendly as they can use the helpline number and report their problem," DCP (headquarters) Ram Badan Singh told TOI. He informed that whenever police need CCTV footage of a particular area, they send a request to the ISTMS control room, which, in turn, provides the specific data. The ISTMS became functional in May this year and has also contributed to over 80% of the total challans issued between May and September. According to official data, out of the 1.7 lakh challans issued to traffic violators in this period, the ISTMS issued 1.35 lakh challans. The number of challans issued by this technology-based system has steadily risen over the months. The data revealed that while it issued 14,313 challans in May, the number increased to 28,379 in June, 33,448 in July, 23,722 in August and 34,797 in September. Most of the challans, said officials, are for common violations like not wearing helmets, three riders on a motorcycle, wrong-side driving, jumping traffic signals and overspeeding. Officials said that it also helps keep a close watch on roads through live monitoring and video footage, easily captured with the help of high-resolution cameras. The system has made it easy to read the number plate and the exact location and time of a vehicle. It can be presented as evidence as well, an official said. Two more locations in the city will get the ISTMS cameras, taking their total number to 1,065. The project costs over Rs 65 crore in total. A command centre has been built at Sector 94 for monitoring and managing traffic movement. Besides the cameras, busy crossings have adaptive traffic light control and speed detection systems. In addition, just a few clicks from the ITMS control room can create a 'green corridor' for ambulance emergency movement. Greater Noida will also get the ISTMS, and officials are under instructions to conduct a study and submit a report on it.


heading:  Two minor boys sodomise friend; Mumbai cops file case 
content: The accused boys were sent to the Dongri Children's Home, police said. MUMBAI: Mumbai Police have registered a case against two boys for allegedly sodomising their friend, also a minor, an official said on Tuesday. The victim and the accused are residents of suburban Khar and knew each other well, he said. The incident occurred recently wherein the boys performed unnatural sex with the victim while another minor boy shot the incident on his mobile phone and circulated the clip. A case was registered on Monday after the victim's father noticed the clip of his son on the mobile phone and questioned him, the official said. A case was registered under section 377 (unnatural offences) of the Indian Penal Code and the Protection of Children from Sexual Offence Act (POCSO). The accused boys were sent to the Dongri Children's Home, the official added. (The victim's identity has not been revealed to protect her privacy as per Supreme Court directives on cases related to sexual assault)


heading:  Andheri GRP books hawker for molestation 
content: Image used for representational purpose MUMBAI: A hawker was booked by Andheri GRP for stalking and molesting a 28-year-old woman while she was headed home from work. The woman told police he was stalking her for days. Police intend to file a chargesheet by next week.


